2.6
Hey stat stars, welcome to AP Statistics. In this video, we'll be covering topic 2.6 over conditional probability. If you haven't already, be sure to download the guided notes that accompany this lesson from the ultimate review packet for AP Statistics. There's a link in the description below. The guided notes will help you follow along and build a complete set of notes for the course. In this video, we will cover the concept of conditional probabilities, the formula for calculating conditional probabilities, and put it to use. As always, we'll begin by learning the key concepts and skills for this topic. And then we'll finish with AP style practice problems to help you apply what we've learned. Let's get started. And remember, one topic at a time, one step closer to a five. So, this video is really all about conditional probability, but we also have to learn a couple other things that conditional probability allows us to understand. So, a conditional probability is finding the probability of an event occurring, but taking into account that another event has already occurred. So, that's why it's called conditional probability. So we're find the probability of an event occurring on the condition that another event has already occurred. Now let's look at some examples of exactly what I'm talking about. So given that a girl has been selected, what is the probability she wears glasses? So I'm trying to find the probability that the person wears glasses, but there's a condition that it has to be a girl. That was given. That's the condition. Another example says, given that a coin lands on heads, what is the probability that green is spun? Okay. So, maybe I have a a spinner with different colors on it and I have a coin. So, I'm trying to find the probability that I spin green on the spinner, but there's a condition that I have to also flip a coin and get ahead because that's the given. That's the condition. What is the probability of selecting a man given that he is a Democrat? So, I'm trying to find the probability that I randomly select a man, but there's a condition. He has to be a Democrat. What is the probability of getting an orange Skittles given the Skittles is green? Okay, well the answer to that should be zero. But the idea is that we're trying to find the probability of getting an orange Skittles, but there's a condition that must come first and that the Skittles is green. And well, you can't have a green and an orange Skittle, which is why the probability there would be simple zero. Last example. If a smoker is examined, what is the probability he or she has lung cancer? So, I'm trying to find the probability the person has lung cancer, but there's a condition that they must have been a smoker. If you're not a smoker, well, I don't really care about you in this particular case because I'm looking at if you are a smoker, what's the probability of lung cancer? So, all of these questions deal with probabilities, but there's a condition, a given, something that was given to them first. So, the idea is that in each question, there is a given or an outcome that we already know to have occurred or be true. So, generically, this looks like this. What is the probability of A given B? So we're trying to find the probability of A but we're given that B has already occurred or another way we could say that is given B what is the probability of A? So we're still trying to find the probability of A but we're given that B has occurred. And one more way we could ask this what is the probability comma given B that A occur. So again we're still trying to find the probability that A occurs but we're given that B. So either way you say it and the English language allows us to actually say this three different ways B is the condition whether you put the given B in the back or you put the given B in the front or you put the given B in the middle it doesn't matter B is the condition and because it is known to have occurred now we want to find the probability of A. So the probability that event A will occur given that event B has occurred is called a conditional probability. And here's how we write it. So we write it with P for probability. Right? That first P right there is for probability, proportion or percentage. And in front right here is what we want to happen. That's the probability the event that we're trying to find the probability of. And then we have this line. This line basically is read given. And after the line is the given, the condition, right? So this is the condition right here. Now, English language allows us to put the condition at the beginning of the sentence, the end of the sentence, or even the middle of the sentence. But when we write it out using proper statistical notation, whatever we're trying to find the probability of of goes first, and then after the line is the condition or the event that has already been given to occur. Now, let's, you know, we've been learning a lot of different probability notations lately. So, let's look at a quick example here just to kind of process the different things we've been learning. So, 250 people attended a high school basketball game one night and it was recorded what team each fan has rooting for and if they p purchase food or not at the concession stand. The two-way table below shows the outcome. So, we have, you know, were they rooting for the home team, were they rooting for the away team, and did they purchase food at the concession stand or did they not purchase food? So, the first question says, what is the probability that the person roots for the home team? This is not conditional whatsoever. There's no given, nothing. We're just asked one simple thing. The probability that the person selected is rooting for the home team. This is what we call marginal probability, right? Because we're only saying, hey, we have a 180 people trying to cheer for the home team out of 250. So that would be equal to the probability that somebody is rooting for the home team. No condition, nothing else given there. Now this next question says, what is the probability the person roots the home team and purchase food? Again, this is not conditional probability. We see the word and. This is joint probability. So we're trying to find the probability that the person roots for the home team. And remember that upside down U is our symbol for and purchase food. Now this is just a very very specific value. We're going to look into the table here and let's see here. 120 people were rooting for the home team and purchased food out of the 250. Now here comes the next question that is conditional. What is the probability that the person roots the home team? Here it comes. given that they purchase food because this is a given. It's a condition. It's something that we have already known to occur. Now, we're talking about conditional probability. So, let's write this out. We're trying to find the probability that the person roots for the home team. But because there's a condition, we're going to make this line and after that line goes the condition. Now, remember, I could actually write this question with the English language in a couple different ways. Like I could say, given that the person purchased food, what's the probability they roof the home team? But that doesn't change the order of how I write it statistically because purchasing food is the condition, the thing that is given to have already occurred. It must go after that line and in front of it is the probability of what we're looking for and that's the room for the home team. Now, how do I answer this? Well, we're going to actually teach you that in the next couple moments here, but we can actually answer this pretty quickly because there's this condition of they had to purchase food that limits my denominator. I'm only allowed to look at the 160 people who purchase food. I'm not even allowed to look at any of these people because all of these people did not purchase food. So, I don't even want to care about them. I don't even care about them at all. I don't want to look at them. And of those 160 people, 120 of them were rooting for the home team. So, that's how I'm going to find that conditional probability. However, there is a formula that works. So, here is the appropriate statistical formula for conditional probability. So to find the probability of A on the condition of B, right? Because that's what that line means given or condition. To calculate the probability, we're going to do a fraction. We're going to do division, right? We need to divide. On top goes both the probability of A and B. Remember this upside down U represents and. And then we're going to divide that probability by just the condition. The probability of B. That's the condition. Now, I could also rewrite this. Like, I'm allowed to switch this around. Maybe the question says, "What's the probability of B given that A has already occurred?" Okay. Well, how's that going to change the formula? Well, on top is still going to go the probability of A and B because if you need both A and B to occur, it doesn't matter if you do B and A or A and B. But on the bottom now, the condition is now A. So, the probability of A goes on the bottom. So, it's the same exact formula. Again, you just got to remember whatever the condition is back here goes into the bottom and the top is going to be the probability of both. Now, we just saw a question where I calculated a probability of a conditional probability there at the very bottom. But I did not use that formula, but I could have. So, I'm actually show you. Let's go back to that problem real quick and I'm going to show you how I could have used that formula. Okay, the question one more time was, what is the probability the person roots for the home team given that they purchase food? Okay, so we're trying to find the product that they root for the home team given that they purchase food. Okay, so if I want to use that formula, here's how I'm going to do it. On top goes both food and home team. What is the probability that a person selected purchases food and is cheering for the home team? Well, that's 120 out of 250. That's the probability that a person selected at random is rooting for the home team and purchase food. Now the bottom goes the marginal probability of them purchasing food. Well, what's the probability that somebody purchased food? Well, 160 out of 250 people purchase food. But here is the magic of algebra. If I take that top fraction, 120 divided by 250, and I divide by another fraction, but remember dividing by a fraction is the same thing as multiplying by its reciprocal. Look what happens. Those 250s cancel and I get 120 out of 160 which is the original value I gave you earlier because here's the thought process. Food is the condition. So I'm only allowed to look at the 160 people which makes 160 my new denominator in of those 160 people 120 also and we're rooting for the home team. That's my denominator or my numerator, excuse me. Now again, this is an awesome formula, but with a two-way table, you actually don't need it. You could just use some common sense as long as you truly understand conditional probabilities. All right, so let's look at another problem that does not have a two-way table, but I could still answer it using the formula. On Thanksgiving around the US, 72% of households have turkey on the table. Okay, let me notate that using statistical notation. The probability that somebody has turkey, we could even just use a T for turkey if you wanted, is 72% on Thanksgiving. Okay. 21% of households have ham on their table. Okay. So, the probability that somebody has ham is equal to 21%. 11% of the households have neither. No turkey nor ham. Neither. Okay. Given that a house has turkey, what is the probability that the house has ham? Okay, now this can be a tough problem. So let's first make sure we understand what they're asking. Given that a house has turkey, what is the probability that the house has ham? Okay, so let's use our conditional formula because I see that word given here. So I know I'm working with conditional formula. What is the probability they have ham? So I'm trying to find the probability of ham, which if that was all they asked, I'd be done 21%. But they're giving us a condition given that they had turkey. Okay, so our formula tells us that on top is the probability of both. You could even write both if you want there, but that's turkey and ham, which unfortunately was never given to me in the problem. I was given the probability they have neither, but I wasn't given the probability they have both. So, which we'll figure that out in a second. And then the denominator goes the probability of just the condition turkey. Okay, so I'm actually kind of halfway done with the problem because I already know the probability of turkey, which is 72%. So in the denominator of my final answer is going to go 72% because that's the probability of turkey. But what I have to do now is figure out the probability of both. And this can be a little bit tricky. And if you watch my video over excl mutually exclusive events, I kind of did this similar thing here. I like to use a little table. So I'm going to make a little table here with four boxes. Okay. On the left hand side, we're going to do turkey and then not turkey. And we know that 72% of people had turkey, which means 28% did not have turkey. Pretty simple complement rule there, right? 72% had it, 28% don't. Then across the top, we're going to do ham and not ham. I'll use h for ham. And we were told 21% of people had ham, which means well 79% of people did not have ham. Just the complement rule there. Now, what we were given was the neither. No turkey nor ham. That's going to be this box right here, which is 11%. And since I have that, I can actually fill everything else in now. I know that this entire row right here for not turkey has to add up to 28. So if I do 28 minus.11, I get that 17% of people had ham but not turkey. Then I know that this entire column right here has to add up to 79% for not having ham. So if I take 7.79 subtract 0.11, I get 68. So this is the 68% of people that had turkey but not ham. And then the last box I could figure out by using the row or the column is both turkey and ham. So I know that this column has to add up to 21%. So this would be 0.05. And same thing. Oh, wait a minute. Did I do that wrong real quick? Yeah, I did. I'm so sorry. Try to do that. I'm a math teacher. I should have known that. 0.04. 004 there. So now the column adds up to 21%. And the row adds up to 72%. But what I just figured out with a quick little table is that 4% of people had both. So that's going to be my numerator. So again, I go back to that conditional probability formula. Top is both, which I just figured out is 4%. Bottom is 72%. That's probability of turkey the condition. So if I divide 0.04 by 72 I get 0.05 five6. Okay. So about you can estimate about 6% of people that had turkey also had ham. Hopefully that makes a lot of sense. But that's where we definitely going to need that awesome conditional probability formula. All right. Now you need to be able to calculate conditional probabilities like we just did. Right? Hopefully that all made sense to you. But we also have to be able to recognize them when they are given to you in written form. So let's look at some written form statements that involve conditional probabilities. And let's write them out. So the first one is the probability that it will rain is 20%. Given that the sky is already cloudy. All right. So let's write this out. So we're trying to find the probability of rain. So the probability it rains given it is cloudy is 20%. So again, when it's cloudy outside, it could rain or it could not rain. But if it's cloudy, we know there's a 20% chance it will rain. So notice how I wrote that conditional probability out. Another one here, if a p person truly has a specific disease, the probability that a medical test will correctly indicate a positive result is 5%. So if somebody has a disease, they could get a positive result on a test or they could get a negative result on the test. Well, this question says the probability that the medical test will indicate positive. So, the probability of a positive test given that they actually have the disease is 0.05. So, again, notice how I wrote that out. The condition goes in the back. If a person has the disease, given that they have the disease, what do we know? We know they have the disease. The probability that they get a positive result is 0.05. So, that's another one. Let's do two more examples. The probability of a car being involved in an accident given that the road conditions are icy is 43%. So the probability that a car gets into an accident given or on the condition that the roads are icy one particular day is 43%. That's pretty high. I don't think I'd go driving that day. If there's a 43% chance it's icy out and I get in an accident, not driving. All right, here's another example. The likelihood of a student achieving an A grade on an exam given that they spent less than five hours studying is 75%. So the likelihood of a student getting an A. So we're trying to find the probability that a student gets an A on an exam given that they spend less than five hours studying less than five hours. And the probability is 75. So if you study less than 5 hours, the probability you get an A is 75%. So hopefully that makes sense. But we got to be good at recognizing those ideas. All right, so that's it for conditional probabilities. But the issue is this. If we revisit the conditional formula, we actually kind of create another formula. Let me explain. So here is our conditional form that we already talked about. Now with a little bit of algebra instead of dividing by the probability of B I can multiply the probability of B to both sides and then I will get this statement. The probability of A and B that's this top part right here is equal to the probability of B multiplied by the probability of A given B. So what I just did there and again all I did was took this division of the probability of B and multiplied it to the other side and I just found a new formula for the probability of A and B. So to find the probability that event A and event B happens is the probability of B times the probability of A given that B has occurred. And here's the cool thing. I could even do this a different way. So notice I talked about earlier about I could switch these up. Now I'm trying to find the probability of B given that A has occurred and that formula is going to be on top still the probability of A and B but the bottom is the probability of the condition which is now A. But the same thing if I multiply the probability of a to both sides using a little bit of algebra I get a new formula. The probability of a and b equals the probability of a times the probability of b given a. Now why is this important? Because this leads me to something called the multiplication rule. Because notice, well, I'm multiplying. All right. So the multiplication rule says this. The general multiplication rule states that the probability that events A and B will occur. Right? That's what we're trying to find. The probability of A and B is equal to the probability that event A will occur multiply by the conditional probability that event B will occur given that A has occurred. Okay, that sounds pretty confusing in written form, but let's look at that formula I just built. If we're trying to find the probability of A and B, two events occurring at the same time, we simply have to take the probability of A, that's the first event, and multiply by the probability of B on the condition that A is occurred because guess what? A did occur first. So this is an awesome formula that's going to be very useful to you to find the probability of two things happening. This happens and then this happens. We take the probability of the first event A and then we multiply by the probability of the second event B, but we have to multiply by the conditional probability that A has already occurred. So let's look at an example of this really really quickly because I want to, you know, the the rule is kind of confusing, but I want you to see how easy it is to put into motion. A jar contains 20 marbles, 10 blue, four green, six red. You reach in and select a marble. Then without replacement, you reach in again and select another marble. What is the probability they're both green? So I'm trying to find the probability I get a green and a green, right? I'm trying to find the probability I get two green marbles, green and green. I want the first marble to be green and then the second. Okay, so let's use the general multiplication rule. All right, what's the probability that the very first marble I select is green? Well, there are four green marbles out of 20 total marbles. So, boom, there's my probability. But now I need to get another green marble. But now I have to think conditionally. I've already gotten one green marble and I did not replace it. Which means there are now three green marbles left in the jar out of 19 total marbles left in the jar. So this is a perfect example of me using that general multiplication rule. I found the probability that the first event, reaching into the jar and getting a green marble, occurs. And then I multiplied it by the conditional probability of getting another green marble on the condition that that first one was green. And all I had to do was use my brain to think about that. If I took that green marble out, there's only three green marbles left in the jar. And there's only 19 total marbles left in the jar. So this right here is conditional probability. This right here is a conditional probability that I didn't even need a fancy formula to figure out. I just thought about it, right? I just thought about the concept that there's 19 total marbles left and three of them are green. And that allowed me to quickly generate a conditional probability. And of course, you can multiply that out to get your final answer. So at the end of the day, if you are find the probability of multiple events occurring, you need to multiply them. I mean literally multiple things occur you multiply but you must consider how the outcome of the first event may impact the probability of the next event which is exactly what conditional probability is. All right, we've learned a lot about the conditional formula and we've learned a lot about this new general multiplication rule. Let's do tons of examples to put it all to use. All right, here's the first example. A survey of 300 students asks whether they subscribe to Netflix and or Disney Plus. So 300 total students were asked Netflix yes no Disney plus yes or no. All right first question not conditional. What is the probability that a random person selected subscribes to neetflix? All right so 300 total people and of the 300 total people 180 of them subscribe to Netflix. I am done right that's marginal probability. It's just looking for one thing and one thing only. So I'm going to go to my margins to figure that out. 180 people uh 180 people divided by 300 is 6 60% probability that a person who subscribes to Netflix is picked. All right. Now let's do a conditional one. What is the probability that the person is a Disney plus subscriber because that goes first on the condition that they subscribe to Netflix. Okay. So let's do this problem two ways. First without the formula because what they table you really don't need the formula. All you have to know is that the condition goes after the line. So that means I'm only allowed to look at the 180 people who subscribe to Netflix. That's my condition. That's going to limit my denominator. And of those 180 people that subscribe to Netflix, 120 of them also subscribe to Disney Plus. That's my numerator. Both, right? The numerator is both Disney Plus and Netflix, which is 120. The denominator is just a condition which is 180 people that subscribe to Netflix. Now, if I wanted to use the formula, I could do it. On top is the probability of both. Well, 120 out of 300 people subscribe to both. The denominator is the probability of just the condition Netflix. That's 180 out of 300. But again, through the magic of algebra, those 300s are going to cancel and I just get 120 out of 180. All right, let's look at another example very similar with a two-way table. 200 students were asked about their favorite sport to watch and what grade they were in. So, first question says, what is the probability that the selected students favorite sport to watch is soccer given that he or she is in the 10th grade? So, we're trying to find the probability their favorite sport is soccer. Now, if that is all we were asked, all we were asked, well, it' be pretty simple. 53 out of 200. Done. But here, we're given a condition. the person must be in the tenth grade. So that means we're only allowed to look at the 50 tth graders. That's going to limit my denominator. We're not allowed to look at any of these other grades because well the condition was they must be in 10th grade. And of those 10th graders, 10 of them like soccer. So that is my numerator. Both 10th grade and soccer. So 10 divided by 50 is 0.2. So final answer 0.2 or if you want 20%. All right. Next question. Given that a student prefers to watch basketball, what is the probability the student is in the 10th grade? All right, so this time it's flipped. We're asked to find the probability that they're in the 10th grade. It literally says, what is the probability that they're in the 10th grade? Now, if that's all that was asked, we would just say 50 out of 200 because 50 10th graders out of 200 total students. But there was a given. There was a condition that they prefer to watch basketball. All right. So now the condition limits me to basketball. So, I'm only allowed to look at these 60 people who watch basketball because that was the condition. Can't look at football. Can't look at soccer because I said basketball. Of those 60 kids who watch basketball, 16 of them are in the 10th grade or 16 are both watching basketball and in the 10th grade. So, there's my numerator. So, 16 divided by 16 is 267 about 26.7%. All right. So, make sure you know how not only to recognize that you have a conditional probability question, but you know how to actually use the formula to answer it correctly. Now, many of the questions we just looked at were asking you to find a conditional probability, which is yeah, the name of this video. But some problems will give you a conditional probability and ask more questions by you using it, which might end up turning into the general multiplication rule. Let's look at some examples. But first, when conditional properties are given to you, a tree [clears throat] diagram is a great way to help understand the situation. The branches of the tree simply follow the different possibilities. Let's look at an example to explain exactly what I'm talking about. So, a factory produces light bulbs from two machines. Machine A makes 60% of the bulbs and machine B makes the other 40%. Now, 4% of machines A bulbs are defective. See, that's conditional, right? because this 4% cannot occur if they don't come from machine A first and then 10% of machines B bulbs are defective. So you can't be a defective light bulb from machine B unless well you're first from machine B. So now we can actually make a tree diagram to explain this. So here is a light bulb and now again that's a terrible picture of a light bulb. Okay, but we know that 60% of light bulbs come from machine A and we know that 40% come from machine B. So again, it's a tree diagram. Different branches are showing the possibilities. Now, if it came from machine A, there is a 4% chance it's defective, which gives us a free answer that 96% chance Oh, almost wrote wrong number there. 96% that is the complement of 4% would be well good good light bulbs and then we know that if it's from machine B 10% of those are defective and that complement rule gives us that 90% would be good okay so again we cannot get to this 4% defective branch unless we first come from A. So this 4% was a conditional probability. It's the probability of being defective given that you came from machine A. The 10% was also a conditional probability. There's a 10% chance of being defective given that you came from machine B. Now again, these are each conditional. These are all conditional probabilities. What about the end of the branch? Like for example, the end of this branch is both. It's actually a joint. It's the probability of A being from machine A and being defective. I'll just use a def for defective. This branch right here is again another one right here. This is the probability of being from machine A and being well a good light bulb. So you get the point, right? And same thing here. This N branch is the probability of B and defective. And this branch right here is the probability of B and being a good light bulb. All right. So that's how we could interpret conditional probabilities, put them into a tree diagram where each branch is very specific as to where it came from. But now we can answer a bunch of questions. So here's the first. What is the probability that a randomly selected bulb is defective? Okay, we go back to our tree diagram. We see two branches that lead to a defective light bulb. This branch right here leads to a defective light bulb. A and defective. And this branch right here leads to a defective light bulb. B and defective. Now, what most kids do on this problem that gets it wrong is they just add up 10% and 4%. They say, "Oh, 14% chance of being defective." No, because that 4% cannot occur unless the 60% occurs first. The 10% cannot occur unless the 40% occurs first. So if we go back here to find the probability that a defective light bulb is found, we could either be a 60% and then defective 0.04. Again, this is use the general multiplication rule because I need the light bulb to be defective, but it has to first come from machine A or big plus sign because or means plus. Another option is being from machine B 40% and then being defective. Again, this is another use of the general multiplication rule. I needed to be from machine B and then be defective, but that 10% was conditional that you had have been from machine B first. So that is why you cannot just add the four and the 10 to get 14%. You have to take into account what machine they came from first. So now I'm going to do this math.6* 004 plus 04 *10 and we get 0.064. So there's a grand total grand probability of about 6.4. 4% chance that a randomly selected light bulb is defective. All right, next question. A randomly selected light bulb, a randomly selected defective light bulb is found. Oh my gosh, we have a defective light bulb. What is the probability that it came from machine B? Okay, so this is again a conditional question because we know that the light bulb is defective. The question says, what was the probability came from machine B? So we're trying to find the probability came from machine B given that it was defective. Now, if the question just said, "What's the probability that that light bulb came from machine B?" We'd say 40%. 40% of light bulbs come from machine B. We're done. But it didn't say that. It said that we know there's a condition. There is a given that this light bulb is defective. [snorts] All right. So, now we got to use our formula. On top goes the probability of B and defective. Both B and defective. The bottom is the probability of just the condition, which is defective, which hey, we just found. So the bottom is going to go the 0.064 which is awesome because we already calculated it because again there's two ways to be defective right A and defective or B and defective which is what we just figured out. Now the top is B and defective right that it's that joint probability which is right here 4*10. So on top I'm going to do 04 time. So again let's explain this one more time. On top is both. So we got to be B and that's the general the general multiplication rule multiplied by the probability of being defective if you first came from machine B which is 10%. And then in the bottom is just defective the probability that a light bulb is defective which we just calculated already. So now I'm going to go and do the math here. 04 * 0.1 divided by 0064 and we get 625. So, if a light bulb is defective, there's a 62.5% chance that it came from machine B. All right, let's move on to another scenario that is somewhat similar, but a little different. A disease affects 1% of a population. A test correctly identifies someone with the disease 95% of the time. That's a true positive. You have the disease and it tests positive. It incorrectly indicates disease in 8% of healthy people. That's a false positive. So it says you have the disease, but you really don't. So let's let D being have the disease and T being test positive. Now again, we have to recognize that these are conditional probabilities. If you have the disease, there's a 95% chance of a positive. If you do not have the disease, there's an 8% chance of a positive. So let's use a tree diagram to really make this easy. All right, here is a person. Now, first the person can have the disease which good news very rare 1%. Or they could not have the disease and that would be very simple to calculate in our brains using the complement rule 99%. Now then we're going to take the test. If you have the disease, the probability of getting a positive result on the test is 95%. And then using the complement rule, we get 5% will get a negative result. Now that's called a false negative. meaning you have the disease but it says you don't. That sometimes happens in medical testing. Now if we do not have the disease which means we're healthy then we could still get a positive result 8% of the time but complement rule says 92% of the time we'll get the negative result which is what it should say. I don't if I'm healthy I don't have the disease should get a negative result but that only happens 92% of the time. So the important thing to understand is that these are conditional probabilities because for either of these probabilities to occur we have to first either have the disease or not have the disease. Now the ends of these branches would be again joint probability. This for example be the probability that we have the disease and we test positive. And but to get to that branch we got to multiply. We have to first have the disease 0.01 01 and then because I have the disease there's a 95% chance of a positive. So again to calculate that all I got to do is multiply but that's actually using the general multiplication rule. All right let's answer a couple questions. Find the probability that somebody tests positive for the disease. Okay, so t is test positive for the dis disease. So there's two ways you could test positive for the disease. You could have the disease and test positive or you could not have the disease and still test positive. So those are the two branches that we have to calculate. So let's figure this out. So the probability that a positive result which we're saying t tests positive. All right. So we could have the disease and then get that positive result. So again general multiplication rule. I have the disease and then I test positive because I have the disease or I could not have the disease and still test positive which does happen 8% of the time but that 8% only happens if you first do not have the disease. All right so again what most kids are going to do they're just going to add probabilities together but you got to make sure you multiply first. So 001* 0.95 plus.99 times 008 and we get 0.0887 0887. So there's an 8.87% chance that somebody tests positive for the disease. All right. Now that says find now this is conditional, right? We're going to find the probability that you have the disease given a positive test result. Okay. So on top is going to go both disease and test positive. On the bottom is going to go just the condition testing positive which we already just calculated. Right? The bottom is the probability of just the condition which we just calculated to be 0.0887. Now I need the top disease and testing positive. Well again we already know that that's right here, right? Disease and testing positive. That's going to be again general multiplication rule. I have to first have the disease and then test positive 0.95. All right. So now we're gonna do 0.01 times 0.95 divided by the 0.0887 and we get 107. So if you test positive, if you test positive, there's a 10% chance that you actually have the disease. All right, final question. Explain why a positive test does not guarantee that a person has the disease. Again, if you get a positive test, there's only about a 10% chance you have the disease, which is still kind of likely, but not a ton likely, right? So, explain why positive test does not guarantee you have the disease. Well, because these tests have errors. First, very few people have the disease in the first place. Only 1% of people even have the disease. So you might look at this 95% as a really strong probability, but it only comes if you first have the disease, which is very unlikely. This 8% is well less than 95%. So like a lot of people, oh 8% is so much lower than 95. Yes, it is, but it's actually more likely because this 8% occurs if you first do not have the disease, which occurs 99% of the time. So yes, 8% is lower than 95. But when you compare it to how to get to that 8% or how to get to that 95%, that 8% is actually more likely because it comes from the 99% that don't have the disease. So why does having a positive test result do not guarantee you have the disease? Well, because this test is not perfect. It has false positives and false negatives. All right, last question we're going to take a look at here. At a high school, students may join the math club, the science club, both, or neither. Here's what we know. 30% of students are in the math club, 25% are in the science club, and 12% are in both clubs. Now, again, there's a lot going on here. So, this is another great example, kind of like the turkey problem we did earlier, where I'm going to make a little box. This is going to really, and again, it's messy because my handwriting is terrible, but this is going to be really helpful. So, let's do math club. We know that 30% of kids are in the math club which means not math would be 70%. Simple complement rule. Then we have science club. Okay. So we have kids are in the science club and we know that 25% of kids are in the science club and then not science would be the remaining 75% of kids. All right. So all the number those are our marginal values. Right? All the numbers within the table are going to be very very specific. For example, this one right here is both, which we were given. We were given that 12% are in both clubs. So, now that we know that 12% are in math and science, we could actually use some very simple math to figure out all of these other boxes. So, for example, this column for science has to add up to 25%. Which means 13% of kids are in the science club, but not in math club. And we know that this row right here adds up to 30% for math, which means that this right here would have to be 18%. So 18% of kids are in math club but not science. And finally, we could use the row or the column to figure out this last value here, and that would be the kids that are in neither, and that would be 57%. So the row has to add up to 70% that are total not in the math club or the column has to add up to 75% that are not not in science. Either way you should be getting 57% there. If you do 18 plus 57 you get 75 or if you do 13 + 57 you get 70%. So this is the percentage of kids right here that are in neither. All right. So that table's really quick and easy to make. I'd highly recommend making that because it's going to make answering these questions really easy. So the first question says, what is the probability that a randomly selected student is at least one of the two clubs? They're in at least one of the two clubs. So if we go back here real quick, at least one of the two clubs. Okay? So that would be the only thing that would be is you're not in neither, right? So if you think about that, 57% of kids are in neither. So all of the other squares you're in at least one. So for example, this is in science only, not math. This is math only, not science. And this is both. But if we add those together, 12, 13, and 18, that's the opposite of the 57, which would be the 47, excuse me, 43% of kids that are in at least one of them. So the answer here would be 43% of kids are in at least one of them, whether that be math only, science only, or both. Or you look at as simply the opposite of being in neither. All right, one more question. And of course, it's going to be conditional. What is the probability that a student is in the science club given that they're in the math club? So, we're not asking about both here. It didn't say and math club. It said given. So, we're trying to find the probability they're in science club given that they're in math club. Like, does being in the math club make you more likely to be in science club? Well, we're about to find out. So, in the denominator is going to go math club. Just the probability they're math club. And in the numerator is going to go the probability of science and math. All right. All right. Now, we already know the probability of science and math. That is easy. That's the 12%. We were actually given to that in the very beginning of the problem. And the bottom is going to go math, which we were also given to in the very beginning of the problem, 30%. So, we're going to take the 12 divided by the 30, and we get 040. So, if you are in math club, there's a 40% chance you're in science club. Now, look at this real quick. 25% of kids are in science club. So if you are in math, you are more likely to be in the science club. Kind of makes sense, right? Math and science kind of go together. So 25% of all kids are in science club. However, if you are in math club, for whatever reason, you have a higher chance of being in science club. It goes from 25 up to 40%. All right, that's it. That's a long video, but it really describes with a lot of good examples how we could utilize conditional probability and how the conditional probability leads to the general multiplication rule, which also allows us to multiply probabilities together to find the probability of multiple events. So hopefully you learned a lot in this video because it is a really important one because a lot of those difficult questions of probability come out of this particular topic.

2.7
Hey stat stars, welcome to AP Statistics. In this video, we'll be covering topic 2.7 over independent events and unions of events. If you haven't already, be sure to download the guided notes that accompany this lesson from the ultimate review packet for AP Statistics. There's a link in the description below. The guided notes will help you follow along and build a complete set of notes for the course. In this video, we will cover what it means for two events to be independent and how calculating the probability of the two events happening at the same time will help us. Honestly, this is usually where probability can start to get a bit tricky. So pay attention and I will do as many examples as possible to help. As always, we'll begin by learning the key concepts and skills for this topic and then we'll finish with AP style practice problems to help you apply what we've learned. Let's get started. And remember, one topic at a time, one step closer to a five. So let's start off with talking about independent events. It's half of what this topic is all about. So events A and B are independent if and only if knowing whether event A has occurred or will occur does not change the probability that event B will occur. So let's get this straight. Independent events means two events have nothing to do with each other. So one occurs, one doesn't occur, the other occurs, the other doesn't occur. They do not affect each other. So one event's occurrence has no impact on the other event. So again that's exactly what this is saying. Two events are considered independent if and only if knowing whether event A has occurred or will occur has no bearing does not change the probability that event B will occur. Okay, so basically the outcome event A has no bearing on the probability event B occurring or vice versa. So how do we actually show statistically that two events are truly independent events? Well, here we go. This is the way to do it. This is essentially a really really easy formula. All right. So if we could show that the probability of A given B equals the probability of A. If these two things are equal, then we are proving that they're independent. Now how does this formula do that? Well, on the right hand side here, we have the probability of A. Meaning the probability of A occurring. Does B occur? Does B not occur? I don't care. It's the probability of A. On the left hand side here we have the probability of A but it takes into account B occurring. So if B occurs and the probability of A is the same as the probability of A when we didn't even think about B. Well then that's proving that B had nothing to do with A which means that they are independent. I know that can be a little bit tricky and we're going to kind of go through several examples to make sure we explain that as best as possible. Now, here's the best part. We can also switch them around because saying A and B are independent is the same thing as saying B and A are independent. So, here we're looking at the probability of B. The probability of B. Now, did A occur? Did A not occur? I don't really care. I'm just looking at the probability of B. But on the left hand side, we're looking at the probability of B on the condition that A occurred. And if these two probabilities are equal, well then that just goes to show that A did not change the probability of B. Because on the right hand side, we basically don't care about A. But on the left hand side, we do care about A occurring. And if A occurring doesn't impact B, well then I guess we're independent. All right. Now, there is a second way that we could also prove that two events are independent. The idea is that it doesn't matter, right? Whatever you put here, whatever letter goes right here has to be the letter that goes right here. So if I'm trying to prove that A and B are independent. I could start off with the probability of A and then add the condition of B and see if it changed the probability of A. Or I could flip it around. But if I'm going to put the probability of B right here, then I got to put the probability of B right here. And on the left hand side, I'm going to think, okay, does adding the condition of A change the probability of B? If it does change, which means that these two things are not equal, then they're not independent. But if they are equal, then we do have independence. So you could use it in either way. It doesn't really matter. But just know that whatever thing goes here, whatever event goes here has to be the event that goes here as well. All right. Now, here's the other cool thing. The idea of two events being independent also leads us to something else. If two events are known to be independent, now again, I can't stress this enough. This is only true if they're independent, then it also holds true that the probability of A and B, remember this upside down U means A. The probability of A and B is the probability of A times the probability of B. Now, where the heck am I getting this from? Well, let me break it down. We just talked about the fact that the probability of A equals the probability of A given B. And again that means that you have independence. If those two things are equal, we have independence. But wait a minute, we have a formula for conditional probability. So on the right hand side, I could use my conditional formula, which I hope you remember from previous videos. But the probability of A given B is the probability of A and B divided by the probability of the condition B. And if I just do a teeny bit of algebra, multiplying this over because the opposite of divide is to multiply. So if I multiply that over to here, I get this statement right here that the probability of A and B equals the probability of A times the probability of B. But listen to me, you cannot blindly multiply probabilities unless you know that they are independent because this concept comes from them being independent. Now recall we've actually already learned that to multiply that to multiply probabilities you must consider how one outcome impacts the next. But if they are independent you don't have to. Now again earlier we learned in other videos we learned what's called the general multiplication rule. The probability of A and B equals the probability of A times the probability of B on the condition that A has occurred. Because remember if I have to calculate two probabilities both occurring at the same time then I need to consider the fact that well one occurred first that's probability of a and then I need b to occur on the condition that a occurred but here's the idea if they're independent this right here is equal to the probability of b because they're independent so a didn't even matter which means we could just multiply a time b to figure out the probability of a and b but I can't stress enough that can only be use in their if with their independent and we're going to do several examples of this video to go through that. All right, so let's look at a two-way table because I'm going to tell you right now, typically when this question of independence comes up on an AP exam, it's going to be dealing with a two-way table. So, is coffee preference independent of gender? So, you know, we went to a coffee shop, we surveyed 150 people, we asked their gender, male or female, and we asked what they ordered, hot coffee, iced coffee, or neither. So, let's do this, right? Let's check if they're independent. Now, there's lots of things going on here. We got male, we got female, we got hot, we got ice, we got neither. Let's just focus on a couple. Let's focus on hot coffee. So, what is the probability that somebody at random chose hot coffee? Okay, that's pretty easy. 63 out of 150 people chose hot coffee. Grab a calculator if you need to. In fact, I'm doing that right now. And divide and we get 042. So, there's a 42% chance that somebody gets hot coffee. Now let's see if I add a condition of gender. Now it doesn't matter. I got two genders. Let's use female. If I add a condition of female, does that change the probability of or somebody ordering hot coffee? Right? I want these to be equal. If these are equal, right? Notice what I've said here. What went right here has to go right here. And I want to see does adding this extra condition change the probability of somebody ordering hot coffee. If it does, well then I don't have independence. But if it stays the same, then I do have independence. So let's see here. Okay, now I'm on the condition of females. So I'm only allowed to look at the females. There's 80 females. I'm only allowed to look at those 80 females right here. Of those 80 females, 28 ordered hot coffee. The numerator is both hot coffee and female, which is 28. So 28 divided by 80 is 35. Oh, so they're not equal, which means they're not independent. Now, why? Well, 42% of people ordered hot coffee. However, if you are a female, for whatever reason, it goes down to 35%. Now, I don't I'm not trying to figure out why. I'm just trying to show you that it's true based on the statistics. If you are a female, you are less likely to get hot coffee. Meaning that the gender of female impacted the probability of liking hot coffee, which means that they are not independent, which basically means that there is an association. Something about being a female made these customers less likely to order hot coffee and that is why they are not independent. All right, let's look at another example. We've actually seen this example in previous videos if you've been following along. On Thanksgiving around the US, 72% of households have turkey on the table for dinner. 21% have ham on the table for dinner and 11% have neither turkey nor ham, meaning they they have something else. Spam, who knows, right? No turkey nor ham. Are having turkey and ham independent events? Okay, so I basically need to check this and I it doesn't matter, right? I can start off with turkey. Does the probability of having turkey does that probability equal the probability of having turkey given that they had ham? Like does having ham on the table change the probability of liking turkey? Did did it go up? Did it go down? Or if it stayed the same, I have independence. So if this right here is true that these two probabilities are equal, well then I could go ahead and figure it out. Now the probability of turkey was 72%. That's pretty easy. I'm done with that. But what's the probability of getting turkey on your table given that you have ham? I'm going to have to use that conditional formula. The probability of turkey and ham goes on top. On the bottom goes the probability of ham, the condition. Now, okay, I have no idea what the probability of turkey and ham is. I only know the probability of ham, which is the denominator. That's 21%. But I have to take a couple moments to figure out what the heck that is. What's the probability of turkey and ham? I don't know. I was told the probability of no turkey nor ham is 11%. But I don't know the probability that you actually have turkey and ham because there's got to be some house that have both. Well, that's where one of these little rectangle charts will come in handy. And I've made these before. I'll quickly walk you through it. So, we have yes turkey, no turkey on the lefth hand side, yes ham, no ham on the top. Yes turkey with 72%, the compliment means no turkey 28%. Just got to do the simple math there. Yes, ham. 21% its compliment is 79%. That's just a compliment. One minus 21% 79%. Or I guess 100% minus 21% 79%. All right. Then we were told this. We were told this right here. 11% no turkey, no ham. So once we know one of those four conditional probabilities in the middle or excuse me, joint probabilities in the middle, then we can calculate all the others. This entire row has to add up, excuse me, entire column has to add up to 79. So this must be 68 that way. 68 and 11 adds up to 79. This entire row adds up to 28%. So this has to be 17%. That way the entire row adds up to 28%. And that leaves that this must be 4%. That way the row and the totals all add up correctly. Which leads me to know that 4% of people have both turkey and ham. So now I can get back to the question. I'm trying to find if they're independent. So, I need the fruit show. Is the probability of turkey equal to the probability of turkey given ham? Like, does having ham on your table change the probability of having turkey on your table? Well, I know 72% of people have turkey. Okay. So, does adding the condition of ham change that? Well, again, now I'm going to use my formula. On top for conditional probability is both 0.04. On the bottom is just the condition, which is ham. 21%. 0.04 divided by 0.21 is 0.19. Okay. Well, we have a major major change. If you have ham on your table, you are way less likely to have turkey proving that there is an association, which means not independent. Remember, the only way we have independence is if this equal sign holds up. And sorry, 72% does not equal 19%. So 72% of people have turkey. But if you have ham, it plummets to 19% have turkey. Meaning something about having ham on your table makes you less likely to have turkey. Well, probably because you got ham, and who needs both? But 4% need both. But again, you get the idea. Now, real quick, I'm not going to go through all the math, but I will make sure I explain this to you. I started with turkey. I could have started with ham, and then I could have checked, is the probability of ham equal to the probability of ham given turkey? Whatever thing goes here in this case ham must go here and then the condition is the other thing in this case which is turkey. So the math would be a little bit different the numbers going to be a little bit different but the same conclusion will be not independent trust me. All right let's do one more example because this is really important and I really want to make sure we practice this. So a simple random sample of adults living in a suburb of a large city was selected. The age and annual income of each adult in the sample was recorded. The resulting data are summarized in the table below. So we got a couple different age categories, four different age categories, and three different income categories. So where we want to know is income independent of age. Now here's the idea that makes a lot of kids kind of get tricked here is there's so many different categories. Don't worry, you only need two. So let's focus on over $50,000. What is the probability somebody makes over 50K? Well, 96 total people in my survey out of 207 make over $50,000. 96 out of 207 is 464.464. So about 46.4%. Now what I want to do is I want to check does this equal sign hold up. What is the probability that you make over 50K given that you are 31 to 45? Did adding that condition of being 31 to 45 make the probability stay the same? If it stays the same, well then I guess we have independence or did it change the probability? Did it make it go up or make it go down? Let's find out. Now I do have to use my conditional formula. So on top is going to go both. How many people make over 50K and are 31 to 45? That's 35 people right there. That's those 35 people are going to go on top. The bottom is going to go the condition. I'm only allowed to look at those 31 to 45, which is 89 people. So, of these 89 people that were under that very specific condition of 31 to 45, 35 of them make over $50,000. Okay? So 35 / 89 is 393. Okay. So what did I just learn? Well, first and foremost, they're not independent because they got to be equal. But what I just found out is that 46.4% of people in this survey make over $50,000. However, if you are in the 31 to 45 age category, you are less likely to make over $50,000. which means something about being in that particular age category, 31 to 45, you know, middle-aged, makes you less likely to have an income over $50,000. So hopefully that makes a lot of sense and the explaining of it is also really really important. All right, let's move on to the union of events. This is the second big topic or the second topic of this of this particular topic 2.7. So the probability of event A or event B or both will occur is the probability of A union B. So we're talking about the union of two events. We're not talking about and, right? That's what a lot of kids think. They think, oh, union means and. No, no, no. The union of two events is three things. It's the probability of A or the probability of B or the probability of even both, right? It's the unit of them. So it's A or B or both. So when I think union, I think or. Now, here's the best part. We have a formula to calculate the probability of A or B. But I want to make sure I say this one more time. And is joint probability. That's and joint. Two things happening at the same time. The union is not two things happening at the same time. It's it's A or B or both. It's actually three things. So, here is the formula for the probability of the union of two events. So, let's get a couple things straight. So, this upside down U right here is or and I just realized I have a typo here. Oh my gosh, I can't believe I did this. This right here, oh you I can't believe I did this. Is should be an upside down U, which is the and. Okay, that's a huge issue that I just had. I needed to correct that. Okay, so the probability of A or B, which is known as the union of two events, is the probability of A. Cool. Plus the probability of B. Awesome. minus the probability of A and B. Now, why why does that work? Okay. Well, here's what we got to think about. An event diagram is going to really make sense here. Okay. So, the union of two events is three things. It's the probability of A or the probability of B or the probability of A and B. I really can't stress that enough. It feels like, oh, you're repeating that constantly. It's because it's really important. So many kids think that A or B means just A or B. they forget about the both. So let's see here. If the entire red circle is the probability of A and the entire purple circle is the probability of B and then the overlap A and B the joint is this part right here. That's the A and the B. So if I simply say okay I want to find the union of these two things. So I'm going to take all of A. Awesome. Cool. Then I'm going to take all of B. So if I do the probability of A plus the probability of B, I have a huge problem. This overlap right here got counted twice. It got counted as part of A. That whole red circle for A, then it got counted as part of B. This whole purple circle her here for B. So that overlap deserves to be counted, but it doesn't deserve to be counted twice. So the idea is that to find the probability of A or B, we take the probability of A, we add the probability of B and we subtract the joint which is the probability of A and B. Now we're not subtracting it to get rid of it. We're subtracting it so it doesn't get counted twice because if I take a red plus b uh purple and I just stop there that overlap gets double counted and that's well not fair. It should have it should be counted but not double counted. So that's why the formula works like this. This is actually called the addition formula. It's a really really important formula even though it actually has addition and subtraction in it. It's called the addition formula. But here's what I want to explain this one more time. You might be getting bored with me on this, but sum of A also has B. Sum of B also has A. And we don't want that overlap to be double counted. So we subtract the overlap A and B away. All right. So hopefully I explained that enough. And this is a really, really important formula. And here's another reason why we love this formula. There are so many probabilities involved in this formula. First, we have the probability of A. Okay, that's pretty cool. That's important part right there. Then we got the probability of B. Another really important thing that's right there. We have the probability of A or B. Remember that or that U stands for or the union. Okay. Then we have this back part here which is the probability of A and B. That's another really important part. And there's actually a fifth probability that you get for free. The opposite of or the complement of or is neither not A and not B. So if you know this, if you know the probability of A or B, the complement of it just by found by doing one minus it is the probability of neither. Right? If you think about that union of A and B is A or B or both A and B. The only thing it doesn't include is neither A nor B. So even though it's not in the formula, if you know the probability of A or B, you automatically know the probability of neither. All right, let's actually look at an example. We're going to go back to our gender in hot ice or neither coffee here. Now, one person has picked at random. What is the probability they are female or prefer ice coffee? Okay, there's that word or which means the union of two events. So, we're trying to find the probability that they are female or I'm going to use this symbol right here, this U for or. You could write or by the way. You don't have to use that symbol if you don't want to. Or iced coffee. Okay, so let's walk through it. The formula says I have to first start off with the probability of female. Okay, the probability of female. That's awesome. I'll use F for female. Then we're going to add the probability of iced coffee. Okay, cool. And then the formula says we need to subtract the probability of both female and well that's the wrong symbol boy. See this is why I would actually encourage you to just use and or don't use the symbols but there it is. The upside down U is and ice coffee. Okay. But let me explain how this works because the table's actually going to allow you to see it. All right. First start off with female. 80 total people out of 150 are female in this survey. Okay. Okay, so the probability of getting a female 80 out of 150. Awesome. Plus probability of getting iced coffee. Well, 58 out of 150 people in this survey like iced coffee. There it is. Cool. Okay, easy. Now, notice what happened. What I did was I took iced coffee and I added female or vice versa, female and I added iced coffee. So, the problem is that these people right here got double counted. The 36 people that both were female and ordered iced coffee, they were counted amongst the females. Those 36 people were counted amongst the females because, well, they were female. But those 36 people were also counted amongst those that liked us that ordered iced coffee because, well, they ordered iced coffee. So, I want those 36 people to count, but they don't deserve to be double counted. So, I'm going to subtract away that overlap, the 36 out of 150, not to get rid of them. Those 36 people deserve to be counted, but they don't deserve to be counted twice. Those 36 people were sum of this 80. They were some of this 58. I want them to count, but not twice. So now I already got a common denominator. So I'm just going to take 80 + 58 and subtract 36 and I get 102 out of 150. So there it is. 102 out of 150. You could divide that if you want. think about 68% is the probability that a randomly selected person who is either a female or prefers iced coffee. All right, hopefully that made a lot of sense and seeing in the two-way table often does. All right, now we're going to go through a huge series of questions that very often come up on the AP exam that incorporates all of the concepts we've been learning. Mutually exclusive, conditional probabilities, joint probabilities, and independent as well as union. So here we go. The probability of event E is 0.27. The probability of event D is 0.51. And the probability of both event E and D is 007. All right, first question. Are A and D mutually exclusive? Now we got to remember back to what mutually exclusive means? Mutually exclusive means that there is no overlap which means E and D cannot occur at the same time. So the fact that we have given in the problem 7% chance that they occur at the same time or both E and D occur that automatically tells me that no because the probability they both occur 7% which means that there is a chance they occur together mutually exclusive means the probability of both is zero. If two events are mutually exclusive the probability of A and B in this case E and D needs to be zero. So, the fact that there is a 7% chance they occur at the same time means they are not mutually exclusive. All right, next question. What is the probability of event E or D? Oh my gosh, I see that word or. I'm going to use my new formula, the addition formula for the union of two events. Well, here it goes. All right, so the formula is the probability of E or D. Remember that's our symbol for or equals the probability of E plus the probability of D minus the probability of E and D. So all I got to do is plug in everything I know. The probability of E is 27% given to me in the problem. D 51% given to me in the problem. E and D.07 given to me in the problem. Now I just got to do the math. Add them subtract you get 71%. So the probability of E or D occurring is 71%. Now let's change things up a little bit here. Okay. What is the probability of event E occurring given that event D occurred? Now, this is a conditional probability question, but it's a really good one that you should know how to do. All right. So, let's start off with our conditional formula. We know that the probability of E given D, again, D was the given, so it goes after the line is in the numerator. We're going to do both E and D. And the denominator, we're going to do just the condition, the probability of D. So again everything I need to calculate this is given to me in the problem. The probability of E and D is 0.07. The probability of event D is 0.51. That's the condition goes in the denominator. Divide and we get.137. So given that D has occurred the probability of E occurring is.137 or 13.7%. All right. Now for the next question are E and D independent? Well, I kind of actually just answered it because we know the probability of E is 27%. And we just calculated the probability of E given D is.137 and those are certainly not equal. So sorry, they are not independent which means that they have an association. See what we just learned is that the probability of E is 27%. But if D occurs, for whatever reason, the probability of E drops to 13.7%. So something about event D occurring made E less likely, which means D had an impact on E. Well, that means you're not independent. All right, hopefully that made a lot of sense. But sometimes you have to be able, you know, the the challenge for a lot of kids is being able to write that. So I actually want to show you a really good write up for how you would answer this question. Not just by showing the math because on the FRQs you might have to write this up. So no, the probability of event E occurring is 27%. But if event D occurs, the probability of E occurring drops to 13.7%. Hence event D occurring changed the probability of event E. And if one event changes the probability of another, guess what? You are not independent. All right. Now let's switch gears and let's look at a different problem now using A and B. And I'm going to ask again several questions. All right, first one. If the probability of event A is 25%. The probability of A or B is 62%. And the probability both A and B is 007. What is the probability of event B? Now when you read a question like this, there's lots of numbers. So I like to go things take things slow. Write down what I know. The probability of A is 25%. The probability of A or and again feel free to use the or. You could also use the the U if you want. The probability of A or B is 62%. And then the last thing we were told was the probability of A and B is 0.07. Okay. Now, how in the heck am I going to use all of these things to find the probability of B? Well, I want to use the union formula. The addition formula because remember that addition formula has so many things in it. All right. So, here I go. Here is that addition formula. Now, what I'm going to do is I'm going to start substituting the probability of A or B, 62%. The probability of A, 25%. Now, the one thing I do not know is the probability of B. And in algebra class, what do you do when you don't know something? You call it X. So I'm going to turn the probability of B into an X because that's what I don't know. That's what I want to solve for. And then finally, I was also given the probability of A and B is 0.07. Now I just got to do some very basic algebra. First thing I'm going to do is I'm going to subtract the 0.25 over to the left and 62us 25 is 37. Then I'm going to add the 0.07 to both sides and I get 44%. So the probability of B based on all the information given is 44%. Nice and simple. All right, let's look at another problem. Very similar setup but a little bit different. The probability of A is 25%. The probability of A or B is 62%. And A and B are mutually exclusive. What is the probability of B? Okay, so again a little bit different. I was told the probability of A. Okay, that's great. 25%. I was told the probability of A or B is 62%. But this time I was told that they're mutually exclusive. Okay. Well, once again, I'm trying to find the probability of B. I got an A. I got a B. I got an A or B. Definitely going to be want definitely going to be want to be using the addition formula. But let's talk about what mutually exclusive means. Remember mutually exclusive means that the two events cannot occur at the same time which means that the probability of A and B is a big beautiful zero. So once again all I'm doing is using the information given and substituting in the probability of A or B which the 62% on the left. The probability of A was 25% or 0.25. I'm going to use an X for the probability of B because that's what I'm trying to solve for. And the probability of A and B is zero. Now, they didn't tell me that, but they secretly did by telling me they were mutually exclusive. Now, all I got to do is subtract the 0.25 over, and I get 0.37. Don't have to worry about that zero. So, the probability of B equals 0.37. All right, let's do another one. And this last one here is actually going to trick a ton of students. All right, here we go. The probability of A 25%. The probability of A or B, 62%. And this time the third piece of information given is that A and B are independent. What is the probability of B? Okay, so I got the probability of A again 0.25. I got the probability of A or B62. And this time I'm told that they're independent. But remember what that means. We talked about that in this video. The probability of A and B if you're independent is the probability of A times the probability of B. So now let's go to our formula and substitute everything we know. All right. So on the left here we have the probability of A or B equals the probability of A plus the probability of B minus the probability of A and B. But because they're independent, I could replace the probability of A and B with the probability of A times the probability of B. But you're only allowed to ever do this if you know they're independent, which it says they were. Now, I'm going to substitute everything in. And this is where it gets a little bit tricky. So, here is the 62% for A or B. Here's the 25% for A. Again, I don't know what the probability of B is, so I'm going to put an X there. Now, this back part's a little bit tricky, so bear with me. I do know the probability of A is 0.25. I do not know the probability of B, and remember, I'm calling it X. So I could replace the probability of A with 0.25 and I could replace the probability of B with an X and I get well 0.25 time X. So again, take a moment to explain that one more time. Here's the or here's A. Here's B. I don't know what it is. Because they're independent, I know that A and B is a 0.25 times B, but I don't know what B is. So I'm going to times it by X because that's what I'm using to represent B. Little bit tricky there. Definitely a little bit of algebra, but I think you'll get through it. All right, now we just have to solve. First thing I'm going to do is subtract the 0.25 over and I get 0.37. Now, this is where I have to have a little bit of algebra skill. Here we have 1x 1x minus.25x. Those are like terms. 1x minus.25x is 75x. Pretty simple, right? Then I just have to divide that over because to undo this multiplication right here, I got to divide. So 0.37 divided by 0.75 is 0493. So notice that all of these previous couple questions were asking me to find the probability of B. But what was given changed a little bit. In the first problem, we were given what A and B was. In the next problem, we were told they were mutually exclusive. So we knew we could turn that into a zero. In this last problem, we were told that they're independent, which means we could find the probability of A and B by doing the probability of A time B. So, every problem was a little bit similar, but a little bit of a twist to it that made it more difficult. Knowing how to do those is really, really important. All right, let's do one more set of problems using all this information that we've been learning. All right, at a high school, students may join the math club, the science club, both, or neither. We know that 30% of kids are in the math club, 25% are in the science club, and 12% are in both clubs. Now, when I see a problem like this with two things, math, science, I instantly want to make one of these tables. It really makes it make a lot of sense. So, first we do math, not math, science, not science. Math 30%, the complement would be not math 70%. That's easy. science 25% the compliment not science 75%. Then the one thing we were told was that 12% of kids did both. Now with this one piece of information I could find all the others because this entire row has to add up to 25. So this must be a 13% or.13. This entire column has to add up to.3. So this must be a8 or 18%. And then I could use the row or the column to figure out that this value right here would be 0.57. That would be the 57% of kids that are not in math lab and not in science club. All right. Now, let's ask a bunch of questions. First, what is the probability a randomly chosen student is in at least one of the two clubs? Now, this is where some kids get a little confused. What does at least one mean? Well, at least one means that they're in one club or the other or they're in both because at least one means anything more than one. So you could be in one club just math, one club just science or you could be in both clubs. So this is essentially or, right? Because remember that's what the union of two events means. It means one or the other or both, which is or union. So let's just go ahead and use our or formula. So, we're going to take the probability of M, 30%. Add the probability of science, 25%, subtract the probability of both, 12%, and boom, we get the probability that a kid is in one of the two clubs or both, right? At least one. So, it's a 43%. Now, again, if you want to find another way of doing this, you could do this. Here is only science, no math. Here is only math, no science. Here is both. Those are the three things we're looking at. And guess what happens if you add those three things together? Yeah, you get 43%. Pretty simple. All right, next question. What is the probability a randomly chosen student is in math and not in science? Okay, for this we just got to look at our table. Math and not science. So that would be right here 18%. So there's your answer. Didn't really have to do a lot of work for that. If you have one of these tables, there was a very very specific probability that was not a conditional probability. was not a union. That was an and which is one of these values on the inside. Again, all of these four numbers inside the table are ands. This is math and science. This is math and not science, which is exactly what the question asks about. All right. Part C. What is the probability a randomly chosen student is in math, excuse me, is neither math club nor science club? Well, again, we don't have to do any work for this. We got it right here. There it is. 57% of kids are in neither of them. But if you're looking for another way to do it, remember the opposite of or is neither. So we already calculated that 43% of kids are in one or the other or both. So if I do one minus that, I'm left with the 57% of kids that are in neither. Remember, anytime you know an or probability, you automatically know its complement, which is neither. All right. And then now for a couple of the big ones. What is the probability student is in the science club given that they are in the math club? Okay, definitely see that word given. That's a conditional probability. So, we're trying to find the probability that they are in science club and then after line is the given that they're in math club. Numerator is both science and math. Well, that's easy, 12%. Denominator is just the condition math club. Math club 30%, there it is. Divide and we get 40%. So given that a kid is in math club, he or she has a 40% chance of being in science club. And now for the next question. Are membership in the two clubs mutually exclusive? Justify using probabilities. Remember what is mutually exclusive means? It means there's no overlap. So the fact that we already know 12% of kids are in both clubs means that they are not mutually exclusive. So no because of the 12% that are in both. And now for the big one. Are memberships in the two clubs independent justify using probabilities? Now, if you've been paying attention, I kind of already set you up with this. Earlier, we found the probability of science given math to be 40%. All we have to do is compare that to the probability of science because remember, whatever goes here must go here. Now, obviously, I could do math, but why do more work when I've already found the probability of science given math? Now, here's the idea. They're not equal. So sorry, they're not independent. What we just discovered was that we were told 25% of kids are in science club. But we found out that if you are in math club, it goes up. You have a greater chance of being in science club if we know you are in math club mean that there is an association. Something about being in math club makes students more likely to be in science club. Maybe because they're both STEM classes and they all kind of connect. So if I'm in math club, that means I might like science and technology and all that kind of stuff. So I'm more likely to be in science. So they're not equal, which means they're not independent. Okay, hopefully that made a lot of sense. I know I did a ton of problems in this video, but that's exactly what you need to see is a ton of problems. That way when you see things on your CL, you know, your quizzes or tests in class or on the AP exam, you'll be ready and know exactly what to do.

2.8
Hey satsars, welcome to AP Statistics. In this video, we'll be covering topic 2.8 over an introduction to random variables and probability distributions. If you haven't already, be sure to download the guided notes that accompany this lesson from the ultimate review packet for AP Statistics. There's a link in the description below. The guided notes will help you follow along and build a complete set of notes for the course. In this video, we will cover what exactly a random variable is and the different types. Then we will use what we've learned about probability to build probability distributions for a random variable. As always, we'll begin by learning the key concepts and skills for this topic. And then we'll finish with AP style practice problems to help you apply what we've learned. Let's get started. And remember, one topic at a time, one step closer to a five. So, this topic starts off with random variables. So, we should probably start off with learning about what a random variable is. Now, a random variable is a variable whose values have a numerical outcome that results from a random process. So, obviously we know what the word variable is, right? You probably learned that back in algebra class. A variable is a letter that, well, you don't know what number it represents. That's very similar to what a random variable is. It's it's a variable whose values have numerical outcome. So very very similar to a variable in algebra but the idea is that the actual outcome the number that we don't know the variable is comes from the result of a random process. So if a random process has multiple outcomes and those outcomes are numbers then we have what's called a random variable. Now we use capital letters to represent a random variable. So capital A, capital B, capital X, you get the idea. Okay, we try to stay away from like O because it looks like a zero. You get the point. Now, here's some examples. So, if we roll a dieice, we're going to get 1 2 3 4 5 or six. Those are numbers. So, we could let the random variable X represent the outcome of rolling a dieice. Again, the outcomes of the random process of rolling a dieice are numbers. And those numbers are 1 2 3 4 5 six. So, that is why this is a random variable. We don't know before we roll that die what the outcome is going to be. But we do know that it's a random number 1 2 3 4 5 or six. So that's why we call it a random variable. And let's let the W, the capital letter W, represent the number of races a horse wins in two races. So if a horse enters two races, the horse could win both of them, that's two. Or it can only win one, that's one. Or it could win none, which would be zero. So again, the outcome of this concept, the outcome of this random variable is either going to be zero wins, one win, or two wins. Hence, that's a random variable because the outcomes are numbers 0, 1, or two. Let's let the random variable t represent the number of seconds to brush your teeth. Okay, you go to brush your teeth, how many seconds does it take? 82 seconds. Okay, well, that's a number, right? So, the outcome of this random process, because every time I go and brush my teeth, it's not going to be exactly 81 seconds every single time. It's well, random. Sometimes it's less, sometimes it's more, but the outcome is a number. And that's why it's a random variable. And the final example is H. The height in inches of a randomly selected man. If you go and grab a man off the street, he could be 71 in tall, 62 in tall, 74 in tall, 68 in tall. And you can actually even have decimals. So, you know, 70.34 in tall. The idea is that it's random. What guy I grab off the street is a random. That's a random process, right? I don't know what his height's going to be, but the result is going to be a number. So, as long as the answer is a number, you got yourself a random variable. Now, what do we call a random process that has outcomes that are words? Like when you toss a coin, heads or tails. Those are not numbers. Those are words. Well, we just call them regular old random processes. So, we could only use this super cool the super cool term random variable if the outcome is going to be a number. Okay. Now here's the next big thing. There are two types of random variables that we are going to be working with in this unit. The first type is a discrete. The second type is called continuous. So we kind of need to know the difference. So a discrete random variable is the outcomes. Remember random variables, the outcomes are numbers. The outcomes are listable and finite. So here we're typically thinking whole numbers because you could list whole numbers. 1 2 3 4 5 six. And when I say listable, I means that like you could literally make a list like rolling a dieice. I could list the outcomes 1, two, three, four, five, six. That is a discrete random variable. Again, outcomes are listable and finite. We know exactly how many there are. And typically, we're thinking whole numbers. Now, what about a continuous? A continuous random variable. The outcomes are infinite, hence literally unlistable. They fall on an interval where any value is possible in that interval. So, for example, if we think about how fast an airplane can go, well, I guess an airplane can go anywhere from zero to maybe 550 miles per hour. I don't know. I'm just spitball. I'm sure there's something that could go faster. But the idea is that when you think about decimals, any number in that interval is possible. Like an airplane can go 123.26 miles hour or it could go 123.27 miles per hour. And you start to be like, "Wow, I can't really list all of those outcomes, especially when you include decimals." So discrete, we're thinking, okay, I can actually list all the outcomes, and they're typically going to be whole numbers. Continuous. Wow, I got decimals galore. I can't list all these outcomes. There's just too many. All right, let's look at some examples of discrete so we can better understand this. Rolling a die. 1 2 3 4 5 six. Look, whole numbers. I just made a list. That's going to be discreet. The number of races a horse wins in two races. The horse could win two races, one race, or zero races. Again, I listed them and they're all whole numbers. That's discreet. the number of t-shirts that Grace sells at a crash show. She could sell one, she could sell two, she could sell three, she could sell 54. Again, there might be a lot of options, but if they're whole numbers, and I can make a list of them, it's going to be discreet. Another example is P. The number of points you score in a game. So maybe you're playing a basketball game, you could score one point, two points, zero points, five points, 10 points, 12 points, whole numbers only, and listable. That's what we're thinking with discrete. Now, when it comes to continuous, typically we're thinking about things that are measured, whether it be with a stopwatch or a measuring tool, something like that, right? These are measured values where anything in that interval is possible. So, the number of seconds I brush my teeth. I mean, I could brush my teeth for 1 second, 2 seconds, 3 seconds, 4 seconds, 5 seconds, all the way up to 252 seconds. But you also got decimals. If you got a really good stopwatch, I could brush my teeth for 98.723 seconds. Right? So again, too many outcomes. Can't list them all. That's where it becomes continuous. Something that's measurable. The height in inches of randomly selected man. Again, so many outcomes that could be when you include decimals. So even I mean even if we just think about whole numbers, we still got a lot. But when you include decimals, something you're going to measure there, you got a lot. All right. So typically discreet, we think count like I could count how many wins a horse gets. I could count the number of dots on a die and continuous we think something that's measurable. All right, so now we're going to move into the next part because that was the first part, right? The name of this topic is random variables and probability distributions and we just covered random variables. So now you know what they are and the two different types. But now let's talk about a probability distribution. So a probability distribution for a discrete random variable. That's what we're going to talk about here first. shows the probability associated with every possible value of the random variable. Now remember discrete you can list every possible value of that random variable. So a probability distribution just says okay great you got a list of all the outcomes. Now let's find the probability of every one of those outcomes. The sum of the probabilities over all possible values of a discrete random variable better be 100%. So if you have a list of everything that that could happen and then next to it you have a list of all the probabilities those probabilities have to add up to one or 100% or else well you did something wrong and you don't have a good probability distribution. All right so the probabilities for a probability distribution can be calculated using the rules of probability. So we already learned about probability in previous topics but now we want to do is put all of those rules to use. So yes, probability can be difficult, but this is where it actually becomes, dare I say, fun because what we want to do now is say, okay, what could happen? And let's use all those rules we know to figure out those probabilities. All right, so honestly, thank goodness we learned them all because a lot of people kind of get mad that we learned all those rules of probability. They don't like them all, but they're going to become very useful, especially in this video when we talk about how to actually build some probability distri distributions. Now, next, there are actually three different ways that we could give a probability distribution. The first is probably the easiest and most famous with a table. So here are three different examples of probability distributions. So for example, here was one for rolling a die. The outcomes are listed 1 2 3 4 5 6. And next to them are the probabilities. The probability of rolling a one is one six. One six for a two, one six for a three, one six for a four, one six for a five, one six for a six. You get the idea. And if we add all those probabilities together, we get one or 100%. Here is a probability distribution maybe for the horse race. The horse can win zero, one, or two races. It's only entering two races, so it can't win three or more because it's only entering two. And then here we see the probabilities for each of those. So this the horse has a pretty good chance of winning both races. And then maybe this is Sarah who's selling her t-shirts. And how many t-shirts could she sell at a craft show? Well, historically, she sells zero, one, two, three, four, or five. So we listed all those outcomes. And then underneath them are the probabilities of her selling those. So again, let's don't forget what the definition of a probability is. Like why do we know that there's a 26% chance that she sells two t-shirts? Well, because Sarah has been to many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many craft shows. And over all those craft shows, she keeps track of how many t-shirts she sells. And she knows that 26% of the time in the long run, she sells two t-shirts. Okay, that's a quick review, but you get the idea. Now, the big thing is, okay, awesome. Now, we know the outcomes, but how do we get these probabilities? Well, that's where we got to use the rules that we've been learning about probability. And we're going to do a lot of examples in this video. So, just get ready. All right. The second way that we could represent a probability distribution is with a graph. This is where we simply have the outcomes on the x-axis. So, the outcomes for this random variable are 0, 1, 2, or three. This would be discreet, whole numbers only. And then we use bars to show the height, which represents the probability. So the probability of getting zero as the outcome is 10%. 0.1 right there. Or here we see the probability of getting a one is.25 or 25%. The probability of a two is.3 or 30% and the probability of a three is.35 or 35%. But instead of me just giving you the probability we see a bar that goes up to the probability. So you have to do a little bit more exploring. Now, the final way is probably the most rare and we're actually not going to use it in this video, but we will use it in the future videos is a function. Now, remember what is a function back from algebra. You put something in and you get something out. So, a probability function is where you put in the outcome that you're looking for and you get out the probability. Now, you might be like, what the heck is this? Well, we're actually going to learn about this particular form in a later video, so do not worry about it right now. But the idea is it's a function. So, if I'm saying, hey, what's the probability that the outcome is six? Well, you plug six into the function and some math gets done and out comes the probability of an outcome of six. All right. So now what we're going to do is understand this. Probability distributions are great. They're very awesome because they list all the outcomes. They list all the probabilities for discrete random variables. But how do you get one of them? Well, the best way is it's given to you. So that's one way. A probability distribution is just given to you and then you're going to be asked some questions about it. or you have to read the problem and create one on your own. And that's where it gets tricky because to do that, we have to learn about all of those different rules of probability and we have to put all those rules of probability to use. So best case scenario, a probability distribution is given to you and you could just answer questions on it. Like let's just say I give you this probability distribution right here for Sarah and I say, "Okay, what's probability Sarah sells four or more shirts?" Well, you'd say, "Oh my gosh, four or more would be four or five." So, we'd add those together. 16% chance that Sarah sells four or five t-shirts. So, again, those are really, really easy if this is given to you. But how do you build one on your own? Like maybe how do I create this on my own? Well, that's where it gets a little bit tricky. So, let's start looking at some examples right now. Now, we're actually going to look at quite a few examples in this video. So, I know it might get a little bit boring, but the other cool thing is by doing all these examples, you're going to make your understanding of probability so much better because that's exactly what we're doing, calculating probabilities. So, let's dive into our first example right now. Now, let's actually talk about that horse example first. A horse enters two races. Now, we have to be given some information to figure out the probabilities. So, here we go. The probability it wins the first race is 70%. If it wins the first race, wait a minute, that certainly sounds like a conditional sentence is about to come. If it wins the first race or on the condition it wins the first race, the probability it wins the second is 85%. If it loses the first, the probability it wins the second is 40%. Create a probability distribution for W, the number of wins the horse could get. Okay. Now, the moment I see these conditional statements, if he wins the first, if he loses the first, probabilities change. A tree diagram is going to help me tremendously, especially when it comes to calculating the probabilities that he wins one, two, or zero races. So, let's take a look at the tree diagram. Really, really easy to create. So, the fe first race, right, probability wins, here's the first race. Probability wins the first race is 70%. Complement rule tells me automatically, free of charge, 30% chance he loses the first race. Then as it said if the horse wins the first race in the second race he has an 85% chance to win which again compliment rule tells me 15% chance to lose. If he loses the first race then he only has a 40% chance to win the second race. Compliment rule tells me 60% chance to lose the second race. So this allows me now to build the model right. So I can say okay how many wins could he get? Well, this first branch results in two wins. Wins the first and wins the second. So, how do we figure out the probability of winning both races? Well, we just got to follow the branch. 7 times.85 because he has to, you know, he can't get to the 85% unless he has that 70% happen first. So again, that's actually the general multiplication rule. wins the first 70% wins the second on the condition that he won the first and that's where we get that 85% from and we just multiply 7 * 085 and we get 0.595. So 0.595 is the probability of winning two races because that's what this comes down to. Now what about losing both? That would be zero wins. That's this bottom branch. Zero wins losing both. That would be 30 lose the first and then 60 lose the second based on losing the first. So multiply.3 times 6 and we get8. So there's the probability of zero wins. Now here's the tricky part and this is what makes probability super fun in my opinion. There are two ways to win one race. Win the first, lose the second. That's this branch right here that results in one win. Or another way to get one win is lose the first but win the second. That also results in one win. So I have to do is calculate each of those branches separately and add them together because at the end of the day they're different but they both result in the same random variable of one win. So we could lose excuse me win the first but then lose the second or lose the first win the second. So again let me figure out these probabilities. 7 *.15 is 105 and then 3 *4 is.12 and now I'm going to add those together because both of them yes they are different right they're different outcomes win lose lose win but they both result in one win and ultimately that's what I'm trying to figure out is what are the different outcomes for how many races the horse could win so if I add those together we get 225. So here's my probability distribution, right? It's going to have the outcomes, zero win, one win, two wins. We typically go in numerical order, starting with the lowest and going to the highest. And then here are those probabilities I just calculated. For two wins, we did the 7* 085, we got 0.595. Here's was the zero wins where we multiplied the 3 and the 6. And then here was the one win, which remember we had to do two different branches and add them together for those two different outcomes that both resulted in one win. So here is my final probability distribution that I created using well the rules of probability. Congrats. All right, let's look at another one that gets a little trickier. Students are given three attempts to get a question correct on a test. On the first attempt, a student has a 50% chance of getting the question correct. If needed, the probability of getting it correct on a second attempt is 70%. So basically, if they get it right on the first question, yay, they're done. But if they get it wrong, they get a second attempt, and now they have a 70% chance of getting it right on the second attempt. If they need a third attempt, which means they got the first one wrong, the second one wrong, now they have learned a little bit. They've maybe process of elimination. Now they have a 90% chance to get it correct. Now they only get three chances. So if they get it wrong then well then they get it wrong. Now let A be the random variable for how many attempts the student will need. All right. So if a student approaches a question and they say okay how many attempts do I need? Well I need one attempt. I get it right right away. I need two attempts. I I I get it wrong but then I get it right. I need three attempts. I get it wrong. I get it wrong. I get it right. Or wait a minute. There's another option for three attempts. I get it wrong. I get it wrong. I get it wrong. And because I was only allowed three attempts, I'm done. So I cannot have zero attempts because I have to try the one question, right? And I can't have four or five or six because well, that's not possible. I'm only allowed three attempts. So this is another example where a tree diagram is going to make it so awesome because the probabilities change depending on what happened first, which means we have to think conditionally. All right. So here is the test. First question. First question, I get it right or I get it wrong. 5050 50% 50%. Now, if I get it right, I'm done. And it took me one attempt. So, there is the probability of one attempt. That's it. 50%. Easy. Now, if I get it wrong, then remember the probability for the second attempt goes up. It's now 70% to get it right. Complement rule 30% to get it wrong. All right. So, here would be two attempts wrong, but then right on the second attempt. So, it took me two attempts to get it right. Now, what about the third attempt? Well, if I get it wrong and I get it wrong, it now have an increased chance, a 90% chance to get it right or I get it wrong again. Now, either one of these branches here both end in three attempts. So, that's what we got to understand. Kind like the horse race, there was two ways to get one win. Same thing here. There's two ways for it to take three attempts. Wrong, wrong, right? Or wrong, wrong, wrong. And then I'm done. So, now all we got to do is figure out each of these branches. So, right, one attempt, get it right right away. 50%, that's easy. Done. Now, what about two? Well, that's going to be 50% getting the first one wrong. And then 70%. So, we just got to multiply 0.5 times 7. So, all you got to do with multiple questions is multiply to get to the end of that branch. So, that's going to be 35. Now, now we got to do each of these separately and then add them together because they both result in three attempts. Even though they're different, three attempts. All right. So, we get it wrong.5. we get it wrong again three and then times 0.9 we get it right. So this is 0.135 and then the bottom branch is wrong 0.5 times wrong again.3 and times wrong again 0.1 0015 and we have to add these together because both of them result in three different attempts. So here's my probability distribution. One attempt, two attempt, or three attempts. Again, cannot have four attempts. It wasn't even allowed. And here is me putting those probabilities in that we just showed how to calculate. So here was that probability of getting one attempt. You get it right right away. Wrong then right. That's two attempts and then three attempts. Remember has two different options. That's why I added those together. 0.135 and 0.015. Add them together gives me the 0.15 or point. Yeah. 0.15. So make sure you really understand how three attempts has more than one outcome. That's where students can get a little bit tricky. And now you can start to see, boy, is it it's a lot nicer if they just give me the probability distribution, which does happen quite often on the AP exam, but sometimes you have to do the work by yourself. All right, let's look at another example here. And again, don't get bored with all these examples. They're going to help you understand probability tremendously. All right, the following probability distribution shows the number of points a player can earn on a single play of a game. So maybe it's some type of video game and you play the video game one time and you could score zero, one or two points. All right. And we have the probabilities based on this graph. So the probability of zero is.3. So 30% chance I get zero points. There's a 50% chance I get one point and 30% chance I get Oh no. Oh no. I'm sorry. I messed that one up. That's a 20%. I have terrible eyesight. 20% chance. Hopefully you're seeing that for getting two points. Okay. assuming each play of the game is independent of the next which means that now we don't have to worry about conditional probabilities because it's independent. So what happens on the first play doesn't matter for the second or or third play consequently after that. So what they want me to do is create a probability distribution for t the total number of points if the game is played twice. So we're going to play the game once. So here's maybe the first play of the game. We're going to play the game the second time. Why I have a hard time uh spelling. play the game a second time and then we're gonna add our points together. We're gonna add what happens here to what happens here and we're going to get a total and we want to create a probability distribution for that total. Okay, so let's start thinking about first what the outcomes could even be. Well, I could get zero. Well, that means I get zero on the first. So, let's kind of separate this, right? This is the first play and this is the second play. Okay, if I get zero on the first, zero on the second, that is a grand total of zero points. Okay, what else? Well, I could get one point. I could get a total of one point. Now, this is where we got to really, really start to think, and this is why this video might be one of the best probability videos out there. All right, how do I get one point? I could get zero on the first, one on the second. That would add up to a total of one. Or I could get one on the first, zero on the second. That also adds up to one. So there is one way to get zero points. 0 0. If you switch it around, it's still 0 0. But when it comes to getting one point, we actually have two different ways that we could do that. Zero on the first, one on the second. Or flip that around. One on the first, zero on the second. Those are both distinctly different outcomes that have the same random variable one at the end. All right. Now, how could we get two points? Okay. Can we make this even more complicated? Maybe. All right. Well, let's see here. We could get zero on the first, two on the second, or two on the first, zero on the second. That is different, right? That's different. Or we could even get one on the first and one on the second. Now, that's it. There's no other outcomes because again I can't flip one and one. If I get one on the first and one on the second, if I flip that, it's still one on the first and one on the second. But zero on the first, two on the second. That is different than two on the first and zero on the second. But all three of these outcomes end with well me getting two total points. All right. And the last outcome is getting three points. Now what has to happen for me to get three points? Well, I could get one on the first, two on the second. That would add up to three. Or two on the first, one on the second. That is different, but it still adds up to three. Now, every now and then I'll get a kid in class say, "Oh, another option is three on the first, zero on the second, or zero on the first, and three on the second." I say, "Kind of, but you can't get three points on any single play of the game. That's impossible." So, I know logically you might want to think about three and zero, but three is not even an option. So here are those different outcomes, right? So we figured all this out. Hopefully that all makes sense you guys of how all this happens. So we got these groupings, right? So we got these four different groupings for our four different outcomes. Now we got to start thinking about the probability. Okay, this is actually pretty easy. Multiple plays of the game, we multiply. So if we want zero on the first, that's going to be.3. And then we need another zero. Well, that's another.3. So multiply, we get our probability there. Now what about one? Well, the first outcome is zero on the first.3 and then one on the second.5. Now, we could also do one on the first 0.5 and 3, which is zero on the second. Now, those mathematically are both the same. I mean, 3 * 0.5 is 0.15 either way, but they are distinctly different, right? These are two different outcomes. Even though the numbers are both 0.15 and 0.15 the ordering is different and that matters when you have the first play and the second play. So we have to add those together. So the total probability for one point total is going to be.3. All right. Now we got to do the same thing for two points here. Okay. We could get 0.3 and then two and then we could get two first 2 and then 0 2.3 and then we could get one first.5 and then one second.5 and again you can't flip one and one around it wouldn't be any different. All right so we get 006 here 006 here even though those 006 are the same they are distinctly different and then 0.25 here. So we got to add those together to get our total uh of probability of 37 for getting a total of two. All right. And finally getting a total of three we could get the one which is 0.5 and then we could get the two which is 2 or we could switch that around 2 and then the 0.5. Again they mathematically both of these are going to result in 0.5 times 0.2 which is 0.1 but they are different distinct outcomes right so that's why we add them together and we get 0.20 there for that probability. So here's my probability distribution showing those outcomes. OH AND OH MY GOSH HOPEFULLY you were screaming at the camera. I forgot about four. You could get two and two. Oh my gosh I'm such an idiot. I'm have to I'm going to squeeze that in down here. You could get four, but there's only one way for that to happen. Two on the first, two on the second. And then probability, that would be 0.2. That's to get the four or to get the two. And then 0.2 again. So that would be 0.2 *2 or 0.04. I can't believe I forgot that. Or maybe I forgot on purpose. Was hoping you guys would be screaming at the computer to try to remember that. All right. So there are my outcomes. And boom. Here are all those probabilities for figuring those out. Now again, remember how I calculate these probabilities. Multiple plays of the game. I multiplied. I just had to really think about how I did that. And then your final probability distribution doesn't need all that math in it. It just needs those final probabilities. So yes, this was kind of messy and it's a lot to be messy, right? But this needs to be super night and nice, all of your final answers there. But again, really take the time to process that problem. Maybe even watch that again. It's a really good one. All right, let's move on to another problem. This is a really common one I've seen on the AP exam. something along these lines. In the wild, when a lion has two cubs, the probability the second born cub survives depends on the first. That's conditional. What happens to that second cub depends on the first. Conditional probability. Now, the probability that the first cub survives is 75%. If the first survives, the probability the second also survives is 45%. So, if the first one survives, oh, that's conditional, the probability the second one survives is 45%. If the first doesn't survive, the probability the second does is 65%. So basically, it's tough for a mom lion to take care of two cups. So if the first one survives, the second one has a lower chance of surviving. But if the first one for some reason does not survive, then the second one actually has a higher chance. Now, what they want us to do here is create a probability distribution for how many of the cubs survive. So let's see, maybe we do S for survive. How many CUBS SERVES SURVIVE? WELL, both of them could survive. the first one and the second one. Or maybe only one of them survives, whether it be the first or the second. So that's going to have two outcomes because either one of them could be the surviving cub. Or maybe something very unfortunate happens and nine of them you get zero that survive. But again, this is a random variable because it's a numerical number. How many survive? Two, one, or zero. And well, now we got to figure out the probability distribution. And guess what? Tree diagram is going to make this really easy. All right. First, we were told there's a 75% chance the first cup survives. Use the complement rule. Automatically know 25% chance the second one dies. Maybe I shouldn't say the word die. They should just say not survive. All right. Now come those conditional probabilities. It's clearly said if the first one survives, the second has a 45% chance to survive. And again complement rule I got the complement of that would be 55% it dies. And then it also said in the problem if the first one does not survive the second now has a 65% chance to survive. So complement rule 35% chance it does not. So this first one results in two. Both cubs survive. The first and the second. How many cubs survive? Two. And how do I figure that out? Well, I just got to multiply. First survives and then because of that the second survives. All right. What about zero? First dies, second dies. So sorry, zero comes survive. All I got to do is multiply 25% and then 35%. Okay. Now both of the other branches lead to one surviving. The first survives, the second doesn't. So one survives. First sur first dies, second survives. The other day only one survives. So I got to take each of those branches, multiply them together to figure out each individual branch. But because what they have in common is that they both result in that random variable of one surviving, I'm going to add those outcomes together. And then I'm going to make my table showing the zero, one, or two. And again, we do like to put it in order. And then there are those final probabilities. If you don't believe me, go and double check my work. I know I didn't show it here, but if I do that multiplication, here are those final probabilities for 0, one, or two cups surviving. All right, let's look at another problem. I know I'm getting a lot of them here, but trust me, this is going to pay off. Sasha and Penny each play a game. The probability distributions below are how many points each can get in a single play of their game. create a probability distribution for the difference in their scores. Sasha minus Penny. Okay, so here we got Sasha. Sasha could score 10, nine or eight points. And there's the probabilities. So it's nice it's given to you. Here is Penny. Penny is a little bit better. She could score 11, 10, or nine points. And again, we see the probabilities. But what they want us to do is come up with a probability distribution for the subtraction, the difference of their scores. And it very specifically says Sasha minus Penny. Okay. So, what are some potential outcomes for Sasha minus Penny? Well, Sasha could score 10. Penny could score 11. That's a difference of -1 when we do 10 minus 11. Okay. So, what's the probability of that happening? Well, we need Sasha to score 10. That's 0.2. And we need Penny to score 11. That's 10. Okay. So just multiply 010 time 0.1 excuse me 02 * 0.1 I can talk and we get 0.02. Okay. That's the outcome of that specific situation. But there are other ways you could get a negative one. For example, Sasha could get a nine and Penny could get a 10. That's also going to result in a negative one. Sasha gets the nine. Penny gets the 10. Subtract Sasha minus Penny, we get negative 1. So that's going to be 0.5 for Sasha to get the nine and then 0.55 for Penny to get the 10. So 0.5 * 0.55 is 275. There's my seven. Okay. Any other ways? Yeah, Sasha could get an eight minus Penny could get a nine. 8 minus 9 is also negative 1. So again 8 for Sasha30 9 for Penny 35 and we do 3 *.35 and we get 105. Now again what these these are all different these are very different outcomes but what they have in common is they all have the same difference Sasha minus Penny being negative one. So I got to take each of these probabilities and add them together. So here is my probability distribution that I've set up for those different outcomes. You'll see I already have them all filled in, but if we add those together, we get the 0.40 for um an outcome of negative 1. So again, 0.07 plus.275 plus 105 adds up to that 0.4. So if we add up sorry, if we add up the 0.02 plus the 275 plus the 105, we get the 040 that I had in the table here. Now, I'm not going to walk you through all of these, right? because I think you're starting to get pretty catching on to what I'm doing here. But I will show you for example, you know, how could I get an outcome of -3? Well, to get an outcome of -3, let's see here. I could have Sasha get the eight and then Penny get the 11 and 8 - 3 is -3. Now, is there any other way ag3 can happen? Well, I don't see it. 9 - 11 is -2. 10 - 11 is uh 1. And so there's no other way to get a negative three. So now I can figure out the probability of getting a neg3. Sasha has to get the 8.30. And then Penny has to get the 11.10. And if we multiply.3 * 0.1, we get 0.03. So we go back to our table. That's how I got that probability there. So you get the idea. Hopefully it makes sense of how I built that. But this is a really good problem. We have to do a lot of thinking about what are all the outcomes for Sasha minus Penny. All right, let's look at another problem here. Sorry, I jumped ahead a little bit there. All right, a carnival game challenges players to throw a ball at a target and try to hit it to make a clown fall in water. Shadur has a 65% chance to hit it on any given throw. The game costs $5 to play and he only has $20. He will play until he wins or runs out of money. Create a probability distribution for the number of times he throws a ball. Okay. So, how many times could he throw a ball? Well, let's really break this down. He only has $5. Okay. And oh, I'm sorry. The game costs $5. He has 20. So, the most he could play is four. So, he cannot play more than four games, no matter if he loses them all. Can't do it because he only has $20. But anytime he wins, he's done. He's not going to play the game anymore. So, he could throw the ball one time and he wins. Walks away. He could throw the ball twice, which means he misses and then wins. He could throw the ball three times, which means he misses, misses, and then wins. Or he could throw it four times. But four times has two different options. Miss, miss, miss, wins. Hey, I should have walked away. Or miss, miss, miss, miss. Run out of money, can't play anymore. So again, another example where a tree diagram is going to make this really, really helpful. All right, so first throw of the game, 65% chance he wins, 35% chance he loses. That's a compliment. If we end with a win, that means it took him one throw. Okay, so that's an pretty easy probability. Or we could lose the first, but then go to the second throw. Same thing. 65% chance we win. 35% chance you lose. It says he's got a 65% chance of every throw. Doesn't matter. Not conditional here. All right. But again, this top branch would end in two throws. Lose win. So again, multiply. How do I get to the end of that branch? multiply 0.35 times 065 to get that probability or we could get three throws. So lose lose and then win on that third throw which is also 65%. That's going to result in three throws. But again, how do I figure out the probability of that? Well, I just got to walk through the branches. 35 for the loss, 35 for the next loss, and then 65 for the win. Or we could go lose, lose, lose, and then win. That results in four throws and I won. That's great. Shadur is awesome. He won. Okay. So, how do I figure out that branch? 35*.35*.35 time 65. But there's another way that he throws four balls. Lose, lose, lose, lose. He's only allowed to throw four because after four, he runs out of money. He can't even try it again. So, this is another outcome that is a different outcome. 0.35 time 0.35* 0.35 time 0.35. But it also results in the same numerical outcome of four. So we'd have to take this branch right here and add it to this branch right here. And again, how do we figure out those probabilities? We just have to multiply across the branches. So here's my probability distribution showing the outcomes of 1 2 3 or four. And then here is those probabilities that I calculated. So again, the first one's really easy to see. All we got to do is just throw it one time and win. 65. Now for two, this was lose and then win. So lose.35 times win 65. That's how I got the 0 2275. Three was lose lose but then win. Yay. I only took three tries. I'm done. Okay, that's how I got the 0079625. So getting kind of low. And then this one right here again I had to do two things. I had to do lose, lose, lose, lose or lose, lose, lose, win. So you got to really be careful to understand that those four outcomes had two different ways. Multiply them and then add them together to get that final total right there. All right, so that's it for random variables and probability distributions. So most important thing is what is a random variable? We talked about that in this video. Two different types, discrete and continuous. and then how to build a discrete random variable probability distribution, which is we probably spent the most time on because probability is difficult. And I wanted you to see a ton of examples so you could really see how I'm using those ideas of probability to get all these probability distributions. All right, see you in the next video. Hope this was a good one and hopefully you enjoyed it.

2.9
0:00
Hey statars, welcome to AP Statistics.
0:02
In this video, we'll be covering topic
0:04
2.9 over parameters of random variables.
0:06
If you haven't already, be sure to
0:08
download the guided notes that accompany
0:09
this lesson from the alternate review
0:11
packet for AP Statistics. There's a link
0:13
in the description below. The guided
0:15
notes will help you follow along and
0:16
build a complete set of notes for the
0:18
course. In this video, we will cover the
0:20
mean and standard deviation of a random
0:22
variable and how to not just calculate
0:24
them, but interpret them. And as always,
0:26
we'll begin by learning the key concepts
0:28
and skills for this topic. and then
0:29
we'll finish with AP style practice
0:31
problems to help you apply what we've
0:33
learned. Let's get started. And always
0:35
remember, one topic at a time, one step
0:37
closer to a five. So before we dive too
0:40
deep into this topic, we probably should
0:42
remind ourselves what a parameter is if
0:43
we're going to talk about parameters of
0:45
random variables.
0:47
A numerical value measuring a
0:49
characteristic of a probability
0:51
distribution of a random variable or a
0:53
population is a parameter. The value of
0:55
a parameter is a single fixed value. So
0:58
we talked about parameters way long time
0:59
ago in the curriculum of AP statistics.
1:01
A parameter is any numerical value that
1:04
represents a population or a numerical
1:06
value that describes a population. Like
1:09
the mean weight of all giraffes in the
1:11
world, that's a parameter. Or the
1:13
proportion of all giraffes that are
1:15
under 7 feet tall, that's a parameter. I
1:17
don't even know what that number is, but
1:19
you get the idea. If it's a number that
1:20
describes a population, it's a
1:22
parameter. Well, the same thing could be
1:23
true for a probability distribution. If
1:25
there is a number that describes a
1:28
probability distribution of a random
1:29
variable, then that numerical value is
1:31
called a parameter.
1:33
Now, a parameter is simply again a
1:36
numerical value that describes or
1:38
summarizes a random val variable. So,
1:41
the two major parameters that we're
1:43
going to work with when we're talking
1:44
about random variables is the mean and
1:47
the standard deviation of the random
1:49
variable. Now, remember, don't forget
1:51
what a random variable is, by the way,
1:52
right? A random variable is any process
1:56
where any random process where the
1:58
outcome is a numerical value. So if you
2:01
think about rolling a die, you could get
2:02
a one, a two, a three, four, a five or
2:04
six. That's a random variable. The
2:05
outcome of that rolling that die is a
2:09
number. That's a random variable, right?
2:11
So the idea is that if we're looking at
2:13
the probability distribution of a random
2:15
variable, we should be able to find the
2:16
mean and the standard deviation. Now
2:17
let's talk about exactly what that is.
2:20
So the mean of a random variable is
2:23
known as the expected value. In fact,
2:25
you've a lot of people interchangingly
2:27
use the word expected value or the word
2:29
mean. So make sure you know that they
2:30
mean the exact same thing. It is the
2:32
average value we would expect for the
2:34
random variable after a large number of
2:36
repetitions. So imagine we rolled that
2:38
die over and over and over and over
2:40
again. We kept track of the outcomes.
2:43
the expected value or the mean would be
2:45
the average roll of the die over a large
2:48
number of rolls. If a travel random
2:51
variable was to about to occur, right?
2:53
If we were about to roll that die, the
2:55
mean is what we would expect the value
2:57
to be. Another example I use a lot is
2:59
LeBron James, right? He has a basketball
3:01
game tomorrow night. What do we expect
3:03
him to score? Well, it's going to be his
3:05
average or his mean, 27.2 points per
3:08
game. Now, where did that come from?
3:10
looking at a large number of games over
3:13
his career, he expects an average of
3:15
27.2 points per game. Now, the symbol
3:18
that we use for the mean of a random
3:20
variable is really, really important.
3:21
We're going to see this a lot throughout
3:22
the course. So, there's actually two of
3:24
them what we could use, and they kind of
3:25
go along with the two different ways you
3:27
could say it. So, if you're talking
3:28
about the mean of a random variable, we
3:31
use the symbol mu. Remember, the symbol
3:33
mu is our uh Greek letter mu that
3:36
represents the mean of a population. But
3:38
because we're talking about the mean of
3:39
a random variable, we put the capital
3:42
letter for what that var variable is as
3:45
like a little subscript. Or if we're
3:47
talking about an expected value, which
3:49
remember is the exact same thing as the
3:50
mean, which is why these two symbols are
3:51
interchangeable, we use an e for an
3:53
expected value and then in parenthesis
3:55
next to it is the random variables
3:57
capital letter that's representing that
3:58
random variable. Again, these
4:00
parentheses do not mean we're
4:01
multiplying E* X. No, no, no, no. We're
4:04
just saying, hey, the expected value of
4:06
random variable X is, and then we give
4:08
our answer. Now, let's talk about some
4:10
examples. All right, let W be the random
4:14
variable for the number of wins a horse
4:17
could have if it enters two races. So,
4:19
let's just say there's a horse and we
4:21
put that horse in two races. That horse
4:22
could win zero, one, or two. It's a
4:24
random variable. We don't know how many
4:25
they're going to win. Zero, one, or two.
4:27
But, let's just say that we entered that
4:29
horse into a race, into a race, into a
4:31
race, into a race. And over the course
4:32
of entering that horse into two races
4:34
over and over and over again, the
4:36
average for the random variable W or the
4:38
expected value for the random variable W
4:40
is 1.415.
4:43
This is in the long run. If the horse
4:45
were to enter two races many, many, many
4:47
times, we would expect an average of
4:48
1.415 wins. So again, imagine we were to
4:51
enter this horse into two races many
4:53
times. Sometimes we get zero, sometimes
4:55
we get one, sometimes we get two,
4:57
sometimes we might get a two again or a
4:58
zero again or a one again. But the
5:00
average of all of those outcomes in the
5:02
long run is 1.415.
5:05
Now, another example is let B be the
5:08
amount of time in seconds Kayla spends
5:10
brushing her teeth each morning. That's
5:12
a random variable. How many seconds is
5:14
she going to spread brushing her teeth
5:15
in the morning? Well, who knows? 81
5:17
seconds, 82 seconds, 185 seconds, 106
5:20
seconds, who knows? But if she were to
5:21
brush her teeth over and over and over
5:23
again, then maybe she finds out that in
5:25
the long run, after many, many mornings,
5:27
Kayla expects to spend an average of
5:29
135.4 seconds brushing her teeth. Or
5:32
maybe another way we say that is the
5:33
average, right? Another word for mean is
5:35
average. The average time spent brushing
5:38
her teeth after many, many mornings is
5:40
135.4 seconds. Or on any given day,
5:43
right, tomorrow, she expects to spend
5:46
135.4 seconds brushing her teeth. Just
5:48
like LeBron James, right? Kayla has
5:50
brushed her teeth many many many
5:52
mornings and LeBron James has played
5:53
many many many basketball games. That is
5:55
why tomorrow he expects to score 27.2
5:57
points a game. It's his average or his
5:59
expected value. Now I like to think of
6:02
the mean of a random variable as a
6:03
journal. Right? So if Cayla were to keep
6:05
a journal and every single morning she
6:07
times how long she brushed her teeth for
6:09
and she writes it down to her journal
6:11
over the course of many many many days
6:14
she's going to fill that journal up with
6:15
a bunch of numbers. Well, the average of
6:18
all of those numbers in the long run is
6:20
her mean, what she expects to brush her
6:22
teeth. Same thing with the horse. If we
6:24
kept, you know, if the owner of this
6:26
horse entered the horse into two races
6:28
and after those two races wrote down one
6:30
one race, and then it did it again, one
6:32
zero race. Did it again, won two races,
6:35
and just over and over and over again
6:37
kept track of how many races the horse
6:39
wins every time it races two races. the
6:42
average of all of those outcomes, the
6:44
average of all those random variables
6:46
would be the expected value.
6:49
Now, great, awesome. Hopefully, we have
6:51
a better understanding what expected
6:52
value is. But how do we get these
6:54
numbers? Like, I just gave a couple of
6:55
them to you. Where did I get them from?
6:58
So, how do we actually calculate the
6:59
mean of an expected value? Well, there
7:02
is a formula if it's a discrete random
7:05
variable. So, can't make sure you can't
7:07
can't forget about what a discrete
7:09
random variable is. So a random variable
7:10
is the outcomes of the chance process
7:12
are numbers. If those numbers are
7:15
typically whole numbers that are
7:16
counted, it's a discrete random
7:18
variable. So here's the formula, and it
7:21
probably looks a little bit funky, but
7:22
let me explain to you. It's actually
7:24
really, really easy to use. Again,
7:25
here's our symbol for the mean of the
7:26
random variable or the expected value of
7:28
the random variable. All right, here's
7:30
how this formula works. You take each
7:32
outcome of the random variable.
7:34
Remember, because it's discreet, you
7:35
have a list of every one of those
7:37
outcomes and you multiply by the
7:39
probability of each of those outcomes.
7:41
And that's what a probability
7:42
distribution is, right? It's a list of
7:44
all the outcomes for your discrete
7:45
random variable and the probabilities.
7:47
So, if you have one of those probability
7:48
distributions, you should be able to do
7:50
this. You take each outcome, that's each
7:52
individual outcome, that's what that I
7:54
stands for right here. You multiply them
7:55
by the probability of that individual
7:57
outcome. And then this is our Greek
7:59
letter sigma. That means sum them all
8:01
together. So we add up all of those
8:03
products of the outcome and the
8:05
probability and that sum is the mean of
8:09
the random variable or the expected
8:10
value of the random variable. Now again
8:13
all you got to do is pretty basically
8:15
multiply each outcome by its probability
8:17
and then add all those results together.
8:20
Now the expected value can be
8:21
interpreted as the long run average
8:24
outcome of the random variable. Again,
8:26
keeping that journal, right? What do we
8:28
expect to happen in the long run after
8:30
we fill that journal up with many, many,
8:31
many, many, many pages? The discrete
8:33
random variable can only take on values
8:35
that are countable or finite. So, think
8:38
about it like this. The discrete random
8:41
variable can only take on countable
8:44
finite numbers, right? Because you have
8:45
to be able to have a list of all of your
8:47
outcomes. That's why this formula that
8:49
we're teaching you right now only works
8:50
if it's a discrete random variable.
8:52
because you have to take each of those
8:53
outcomes, multiply by its probability,
8:54
add them all together. Pretty easy. Now,
8:58
what about the mean of a continuous
9:00
random variable? Remember, continuous
9:02
random variable is when you cannot make
9:03
a list of all the outcomes. The the
9:05
random variable is something that is
9:07
measured where we got decimals and
9:09
decimals and decimals and there's just
9:10
too many outcomes to actually list them
9:12
all. So, how do you find the mean of a
9:14
continuous random variable? Well, there
9:16
actually is no formula. you will just
9:19
kind of be given it like what is the
9:21
mean height of a giraffe? Well, to think
9:24
about that to actually get that you
9:26
would have to repeat the random
9:28
variable. Look at a draft. Look at a
9:29
draft. Look at the draft. Look at a
9:30
draft. Look at a draft. Look at a draft.
9:32
Look at a draft. And after many, many
9:34
drafts you could figure out, you know,
9:36
add them all together and divide by how
9:37
many you've looked at. And the more
9:38
drafts you look at, the average of the
9:40
more and more and more and more drafts
9:42
you look at, the closer and closer and
9:43
closer you're going to get to the mean
9:45
of that continuous random variable. And
9:47
this is exactly what the law of large
9:48
numbers applies. Remember, we learned
9:50
about the law of large numbers way long
9:51
time ago, but the law of large numbers
9:53
applies here. Only after looking at a
9:55
large number of giraffes will we
9:58
actually be able to calculate the true
9:59
mean height of all giraffes. We're not
10:02
going to be able to figure it out after
10:03
five giraffes or 10 giraffes or 100
10:05
giraffes. We're going to have to look a
10:06
large amount of them. There is no
10:07
specific number, just well, all of them.
10:09
A lot of them. All right. So, that's it
10:11
for trying to calculate and understand
10:13
the mean of random variable. Now, let's
10:15
change gears and look at the standard
10:16
deviation of a random variable. So, for
10:19
any random variable, we have the mean or
10:21
the value we expect for that random
10:22
variable to be. We just talked about
10:24
that. But, of course, the actual outcome
10:26
could be a little bit more or a little
10:28
bit less. So, to measure that
10:30
variability, we also want to calculate
10:32
the standard deviation. So, think about
10:34
Caleb brushing her teeth, right? She
10:35
expects 135.4 seconds of brushing her
10:37
teeth, but the actual outcome on any
10:40
given day might be a little bit more
10:41
than that or a little bit less than
10:42
that. And we want to measure that idea
10:45
that the actual outcome tomorrow could
10:47
vary. And we measure that with what's
10:48
called the standard deviation. Now, the
10:51
formula for the standard deviation or
10:52
this, excuse me, the symbol for the
10:54
standard deviation is one of two things.
10:56
Just like for a mean and expected
10:57
values, we could use the symbol for
10:59
standard deviation, which is the Greek
11:01
letter sigma, and then we put this
11:03
little subscript right here to represent
11:04
that we're finding the standard
11:05
deviation for the random variable X. Or
11:07
we could just use the abbreviation SD
11:10
for standard deviation. And then inside
11:11
the parentheses next to it is the random
11:13
variable for we're trying to find the
11:14
standard deviation of. But again, one
11:16
more time, that does not mean we're
11:17
multiplying anything there. All right.
11:18
So the standard deviation can be
11:19
interpreted as the typical deviation of
11:22
the values of the random variable from
11:25
the mean value of the random variable
11:27
the long run. And I know it's a little
11:28
bit confusing, but we're basically again
11:30
think about this examples like let's
11:32
talk about our horse for for a second.
11:34
We expect the horse to get an average of
11:36
1.415 wins. Remember the owner of the
11:38
horse kept track journal after journal
11:40
after journal after journal after
11:41
journal entry. He kept track of how many
11:43
horses or how many races the horse won
11:46
and the average is 1.415.
11:48
But that number could vary, right?
11:50
Because like you know next weekend when
11:52
the horse races two races, he could have
11:54
a different number. He could have
11:55
something more or something less than
11:57
the average of 1.415. So that's where we
11:59
have a standard deviation here and
12:00
that's 683. So we expect the horse to
12:03
have 1.415 wins, but it could be more,
12:05
it could be less. Again, think about
12:07
LeBron James, right? We expect him to
12:08
score 27.2 points tomorrow night because
12:11
that's his average, but he might score a
12:12
little bit more and he might score a
12:13
little bit less. So, he does have a
12:14
standard deviation. Now, in sports, you
12:16
don't really ever hear about standard
12:18
deviation. But, if you're a basketball
12:20
player like LeBron who's very consistent
12:21
in scoring, you're going to have a low
12:23
standard deviation. Yes, he might score
12:25
a little bit more. He might score a
12:26
little bit less, but he's never going to
12:27
be two more or two less because he's
12:29
very consistent. Whereas, you might have
12:31
other basketball players that are very
12:32
inconsistent. They might get a 35point
12:34
game, but then a lot of times they're
12:35
going to have only a five or 10 point
12:36
game. They're gonna have a large
12:38
standard deviation because they vary
12:39
more. All right. Now, let's talk about
12:41
our friend Kayla as well, right? We
12:43
expect Kayla to have an average time of
12:45
135.4 seconds to brush her teeth, but
12:47
you know, tomorrow could be a little bit
12:49
more, could be a little bit less. So,
12:50
the amount of time could vary by 5.64
12:53
seconds. Now, if Kayla is very
12:54
consistent in terms of brushing her
12:56
teeth the same amount of time every day,
12:58
she'll have a low standard deviation.
12:59
But if she's inconsistent, maybe some
13:01
days she just brushes for three seconds
13:03
to just run out the door like my son. Or
13:05
some days, you know, little dirty teeth
13:07
and maybe ate a bunch of Swedish fish
13:09
and it's all stuck in the teeth, so you
13:10
spend three hours brushing your teeth. I
13:12
guess it's a little extreme. Then you're
13:13
going to have a big standard deviation.
13:15
That's the idea, right? All right. Now,
13:16
what about how to actually calculate the
13:19
standard deviation? Well, this is where
13:21
it gets a little bit confusing. I'm not
13:23
going to lie to you. So, first off, if
13:24
it's a discrete random variable, well,
13:26
we already talked about how to find the
13:28
mean of a discrete random variable,
13:29
which is actually pretty easy. Just take
13:30
each outcome times its probability,
13:32
multiply them all or add them all
13:33
together. But when it comes to the
13:35
standard deviation formula, it's a
13:36
little bit different for a discrete
13:38
random variable. You take each
13:40
individual outcome of your random
13:42
variable and then you subtract the mean.
13:44
So, you do have to calculate the mean
13:46
first, then you square that value and
13:48
then you multiply it by the probability
13:51
of that original outcome that you were
13:52
looking at. And then you repeat that for
13:54
every single
13:56
outcome, right? Every single outcome.
13:58
Take the outcome, subtract the mean,
14:00
square it, multiply by its probability,
14:02
then you add, that is our Greek letter,
14:04
sigma, that means sum. We add all those
14:07
values together. And then we take the
14:09
square root of them to get the standard
14:11
deviation. Now, listen, I'm not going to
14:13
lie, that's a pretty ugly formula. And
14:15
most of the time, you will never use
14:16
this formula, but it is on the AP stats
14:18
formula sheet. So, what I want to do is
14:20
I actually want to show you how you
14:21
could use your calculator to get this
14:23
with way less work. But before we do
14:26
that, let's quickly talk about how to
14:28
find the standard deviation for a
14:30
continuous random variable. Well, once
14:32
again, there is no formula. Remember, a
14:33
continuous random variable, you can't
14:35
list all of your outcomes. Like example,
14:37
for the heights of the drafts, I can't
14:39
list them all. So, what do I do? Well,
14:41
I'm just going to have to look at lots
14:42
and lots and lots of drafts. And then
14:44
over the course of many, many, many
14:45
drafts, I could calculate the mean. And
14:47
then I can also calculate the standard
14:48
deviation. But listen, no one's ever
14:49
going to expect you to do that because
14:51
well, that would take forever to look at
14:52
all those drafts. So that's why the mean
14:53
and deviation would typically be given
14:55
to you for continuous random variable.
14:56
All right, let's look at an example of a
14:58
discrete random variable. Here it is.
15:00
Grace sells t-shirts at a craft show.
15:03
Let the random variable S be the number
15:05
of t-shirts she sells on any given day.
15:07
The table below gives the probability
15:09
distribution for S. So again, this is a
15:10
discrete random variable because she's
15:12
going to count how many t-shirts she
15:14
sells every day. And I can actually list
15:16
those outcomes. It's zero, one, two,
15:19
three, four, or five. She doesn't even
15:21
bring more than five shirts. So, she
15:23
can't sell more than six or excuse me,
15:25
she can't sell more than five. And
15:26
obviously, you can't sell a negative
15:27
amount. And obviously, you they're
15:29
t-shirts, right? So, you're going to
15:30
count. I sold two. You can't sell two
15:32
and a half t-shirts, right? Nobody's
15:33
ripping them in half and buying half a
15:34
t-shirt. So, what we want to do now that
15:36
we understand we have a discrete random
15:37
variable here is calculate the mean and
15:39
the standard deviation. All right. So,
15:41
first, calculating the mean is pretty
15:43
easy, and you actually can do it by
15:45
hand. It's not overly difficult. So,
15:47
what we're going to do to calculate the
15:48
mean. Oh, I put an X there. Typically,
15:50
we want to use the letter that the prob
15:51
is talking about. In this case, that is
15:53
S, the random variable for the number of
15:54
t-shirts she sells. We're simply going
15:56
to take each outcome. So, 0 times its
15:58
probability of 008. 1 time its
16:01
probability. 2 * its probability. Three
16:03
times its probability, four times its
16:05
probability, five times its probability.
16:07
Then, we're going to add add
16:10
all of those products together to get
16:12
the mean. Now, that's not too bad. It
16:15
really even wouldn't be that hard to
16:16
show that work. But doing the standard
16:18
deviation, you know what? It's just
16:21
you're not going to want to do that work
16:22
by hand. It's going to take too much
16:23
time and we have so much technology
16:24
around us that it's going to allow us to
16:25
do it really, really quickly. So, I'm
16:27
going to show you right now how we could
16:28
do this. So, I'm going to show you how
16:30
to do this in Desmos because Desmos is
16:32
going to be active on the AP exam for
16:34
you to use. Uh, but you can also do this
16:36
really easy on your T84 or your numeric
16:38
calculator as well. All right. All
16:39
you're going to do here is click this
16:40
plus button and go down to the inference
16:42
app. And at the very very top is
16:44
probability distributions which is kind
16:46
of the unit that we're in right now.
16:48
Right? Then we're going to select from
16:49
this dropown box. Now it defaults to
16:51
normal but we're going to go all the way
16:52
which we're going to talk about normal
16:53
later by the way. We're going to go all
16:55
the way down the bottom to discrete
16:56
distribution. Then we're basically going
16:58
to create the table that we had for
17:01
Sarah. So we're going to list the
17:02
outcomes or the values for the random
17:04
variable. 0 1 2 3 four or five t-shirts.
17:09
Then next to each one of them, we're
17:10
going to give the weight or the
17:12
proportion or probability, right? What
17:14
how much that one's weighted, right?
17:15
It's kind of the same thing as a
17:16
probability. So we have 0.08 for zero,
17:20
0.15 for one, 0.26 for two, 0.35 for
17:25
three, 0.10 for four, and 0.06
17:30
for five. Just make sure you take those
17:31
in as decimals, and also make sure that
17:35
you double check them. You don't want to
17:36
type them in wrong. and then hit create
17:38
distribution. And the cool thing is it
17:39
kind of shows you a little picture here
17:40
and you'll see at zero it goes up. At
17:43
one it's at 1.5. You can actually see
17:45
the values that you just typed in. So
17:47
you can kind of see the shape of it a
17:48
little bit kind of symmetric here
17:49
roughly. Right now the other cool part
17:51
is look how quick it is to get the mean
17:53
and standard deviation. All you got to
17:54
do is click right here where it says
17:56
summary and boom, you're done. There's
17:58
your mean 2.42 and there's your standard
18:00
deviation 1.258. And if you want a
18:03
couple more decimals, just go ahead and
18:04
click on the little box right there next
18:06
to it and it'll give you some more. And
18:07
there's a standard deviation where you
18:08
want more decimals. But three decimals
18:10
is pretty good. So pretty quick and easy
18:12
to go ahead and get the mean and
18:14
standard deviation. Now the tough part
18:16
is because that's actually really easy
18:17
to do. The tough part is that's
18:18
definitely going to be expectation for
18:20
the AP exam is to interpret the meaning
18:23
of these values. So on any given day,
18:25
Grace expects to sell an average of 2.42
18:28
t-shirts per day. But that number could
18:31
vary by 1.2. 258 t-shirt. So, I'm given
18:33
the mean, what we expect her, the
18:35
average, and then I'm also given the
18:36
standard deviation to admit that well,
18:38
it could vary. Another way of saying it
18:40
is after many, many days of selling
18:42
t-shirts, Grace sells an average of 2.42
18:44
t-shirts per day, but it could vary by
18:46
1.258 t-shirts. Again, think of that
18:48
journal and every single day, Grace
18:50
writes down how many t-shirts she sells.
18:52
Probably going to be a lot of threes
18:54
because that's very common. Lots of
18:55
twos, couple ones and fours, zeros and
18:58
fives won't be as common. But in the
19:00
long run, if she fills up that journal
19:02
with many, many days, the average number
19:04
of t-shirts she would sell is 2.42. But
19:06
again, that number definitely varies,
19:08
right? That journal is filled with a lot
19:09
of different numbers that vary. And
19:11
that's where standard deviation comes in
19:12
as well. All right, let's do a second
19:14
example here as well. This time, the
19:16
probability distribution shows the
19:18
outcome and probability for P, the
19:20
number of points a player can score in
19:22
one play of a game. Calculate the mean
19:25
and standard deviation for P and
19:26
interpret them in context. So in this
19:28
particular example, we're not given a
19:30
table for the probability distribution.
19:31
We're given a graph, but we still see
19:34
each of the outcomes 01 2 or three
19:37
points. And then we see the
19:38
probabilities. So we have 10% right here
19:42
for 0,25
19:44
for one, three for two, and 35 for3. Now
19:50
again, all we got to do is go ahead and
19:51
grab our Desmos calculator here. Makes
19:53
it pretty simple. We can go and clear
19:55
that out. And then we could clear all
19:57
these out if we want to. Hit plus
20:00
inference probability distribution and
20:02
go all the way down to discrete. And
20:04
then you got to type those in. 0 1 2 and
20:07
three. And then we got to type in those
20:09
probabilities
20:12
of 0.10 for one, 0.25. Oh, 0.10 for
20:17
zero, 0.25 for one, 0.30 for two, and
20:21
0.35 for three. Hit create distribution.
20:24
shows you a little graph there, but we
20:26
already had that graph. And then hit
20:27
summary. And right there is your mean
20:29
1.9 and your standard deviation.995.
20:32
So that's how quick and easy it is to
20:34
get those values. Just make sure that
20:36
you use the proper symbols to identify
20:37
them as I'm doing here. And then don't
20:39
forget the toughest part to interpret.
20:40
In the long run, after many plays of the
20:42
game, a player can expect to score an
20:44
average of 1.9 points per game. But
20:46
again, it could vary by 0.995 points.
20:49
And again, think about it. If you were
20:50
to play this game over and over and over
20:52
again and kept that journal, you're
20:53
gonna have a lot of threes, lot of twos
20:56
in that journals, a lot of ones, and
20:57
occasional zeros in there. And those
20:59
numbers in that journal are definitely
21:01
going to vary. But the average of all
21:02
those numbers in the long run after
21:04
many, many plays of the game is an
21:06
average of 1.9 and a standard deviation
21:08
of 0.995.
21:10
All right, let's look at a third example
21:11
here. Let the random variable H be the
21:13
weight in pounds of an adult male
21:15
hippopotamus. What is the mean in
21:17
deviation for H? Well, boy, the hipp the
21:20
weight of a hippopotamus is something
21:21
I'm going to have to measure in pounds.
21:23
And we start to think about a good
21:24
scale. You might have two, three, even
21:26
four decimal places. So, this sounds
21:28
like a continuous random variable. And
21:30
as I showed you earlier or told you
21:31
earlier, there is no formula for a
21:34
continuous random variable. If you're
21:35
given a problem that's dealing with a
21:37
continuous random variable, boom, the
21:39
mean and standard deviation for that
21:40
random variable will be given to you. So
21:43
the average height or excuse not height,
21:45
the average weight of a hippopotamus is
21:47
6,700 lb. But some hippopotamuses are
21:50
more and some hippopotamuses are less.
21:51
So the standard deviation is 1,200 lb as
21:54
well. But again, how would these numbers
21:56
have been calculated? Well, somebody had
21:58
to look at hippopotamus after
21:59
hippopotamus after hippopotamus after
22:01
hippopotamus and weighed all those
22:03
hippopotamuses and averaged on them all
22:05
together. And in the long run, we're
22:06
looking at not 100, not 2,000, but many,
22:08
many hippopotamuses, we have an average
22:10
of 6,700. All right, what about another
22:14
example here? Let the random variable L
22:16
be the weight in pounds of an adult male
22:18
lion. What is the meanest standard
22:19
deviation for L? Well, once again, the
22:21
weight of a lion is definitely a
22:23
continuous random variable because I'm
22:24
going to have to measure it and I got
22:25
decimals galore. All right, so again, no
22:28
formulas needed here. The mean and
22:30
deviation will be given to you. So in
22:31
this case, after looking at many many
22:33
lines, we'd expect an average of 450
22:35
pounds with a standard deviation of 40
22:37
because some lines are going to be more
22:39
and some lines are going to be less. All
22:40
right, so pretty simple there. Make sure
22:42
that you know the formulas for discrete,
22:44
even though Desmos or Numerics or your
22:46
T4 calculator can get in pretty quickly.
22:48
Now, let's talk a little bit about
22:49
transforming random variables. So to
22:51
transform a random variable to a new
22:53
unit, we simply multiply by the
22:55
conversion factor. So this is actually
22:57
pretty simple. Not trying to over
22:58
complicate things, but let's think about
22:59
this, right? Let's say that the mean
23:01
weight of a lion in pounds, we already
23:03
knew, right? 450 lbs standard deviation
23:05
was 40. Now, let's say we wanted to
23:07
simply convert that to kilograms. And we
23:09
know that 1 kilogram equals 2.2 lbs. So,
23:13
all we got to do is convert these. We're
23:15
not This isn't anything statistical.
23:16
This is actually pretty basic math,
23:18
right? It's kind of out of chemistry as
23:19
well if you're doing conversion factors.
23:21
But all we're going to do is convert
23:22
these numbers from pounds to kilograms.
23:25
All right? So, here's the conversion
23:26
factor. 1 kilogram equals 2.2 lb. So
23:29
remember, I want to put the pounds on
23:31
the bottom. That way, it cancels out.
23:34
And then I'm going to put the kilograms
23:36
on top. That way, these pounds cancel
23:38
and I'm going to be in kilograms. So, if
23:40
I do 450* 1 over 2.2 or if I divide by
23:44
2.2, I will get 450 pounds in kilograms.
23:48
All I'm doing is converting. Here's
23:49
another example. Same thing. The
23:50
standard deviation. It's pounds. I'm
23:52
simply going to multiply by 1 kilogram
23:54
equals 2.2 lb. That way I multiply the
23:57
unit of pounds cancel and I will get my
24:00
kilograms. So 450 / 2.2 is 204.545
24:06
kg.
24:08
2024
24:10
excuse me.545
24:13
kg. And then the standard deviation same
24:15
thing just dividing it by 2.2 we get
24:18
18.182
24:20
18.182
24:22
kg. So again, really, really easy to
24:25
convert a random variable to a new unit.
24:28
All you got to do is use conversion
24:29
factors. But let's look at another
24:31
example. Remember Grace on her t-shirts?
24:33
Well, let's just say she sells her
24:35
t-shirts for $28 per shirt. Transform
24:38
the number of t-shirts to dollars. So
24:41
right now, S represents the number of
24:43
t-shirts she sells. But let's say she
24:45
wants to find the mean and standard
24:46
deviation for how much money she makes
24:49
in revenue, how much money she brings in
24:51
selling her t-shirts. Okay. Well, all
24:54
I'm going to do is say, "Well, wait a
24:55
minute. This is an average of 2.42
24:58
t-shirts, and every one of those
24:59
t-shirts cost $28. So, all I got to do
25:02
is multiply by $28. That's it. It's that
25:04
easy. No one's trying to make this
25:05
hard." So, that's $67.76.
25:10
A lot of six seven jokes can be said
25:11
there. All right, so you get the idea.
25:13
Pretty simple, right? All we're doing is
25:14
saying, "Hey, in one unit, it's 2.42
25:17
t-shirts, but every one of those
25:19
t-shirts is worth $28. So, we can
25:21
multiply. It's that simple. Now, another
25:23
thing you could do is multiply this,
25:25
this, this, this, this, and this by 28
25:29
and then go back and run a probability
25:31
distribution on Desmos, and you will get
25:33
the 67.76. But it's way easier just to
25:35
take the mean that we already know and
25:36
multiply it. Same thing with the
25:37
standard deviation, by the way. All
25:39
we're doing is multiplying. And
25:40
remember, multiplication affects mean
25:42
and standard deviation. So, 1.258 times
25:45
the $28. So, now we're not talking about
25:47
t-shirts, we're talking about dollars.
25:49
So, you know, at every craft show, she
25:52
expects to make $67.76,
25:54
but some days she makes a little bit
25:56
more, a little bit less. Standation is
25:58
$3522.
26:00
Pretty simple math there. All right,
26:02
let's do one more here. This one's a
26:04
little bit tricky, but I want to make
26:05
sure I show you this one at the end
26:06
here. Let's again say Grace sells her
26:08
t-shirts for $28. But this time, we're
26:10
not talking about revenue. We're talking
26:12
about profit. Her profit is $28 per
26:16
shirt. So, we're going to multiply the
26:18
number of shirts by 28, but maybe she
26:21
has to pay like a fee. Like maybe every
26:23
time she goes to a craft show, she has
26:25
to pay like an $8 fee to like sell her
26:27
t-shirts there. So, her profit would be
26:29
taking her revenue of $28 times the
26:32
number of shirts and subtracting that $8
26:34
that she has to spend. It's a onetime
26:36
fee of $8. It's not affecting from every
26:39
t-shirt. Just a onetime fee. So, how do
26:41
we do that? Well, this is where we got
26:42
to remember a couple things.
26:44
Multiplication and addition or
26:46
subtraction affect mean. So I'm going to
26:49
take the 2.42. I'm going to times it by
26:51
28 and I'm going to subtract the eight,
26:54
right? Because she makes an average of
26:56
2.24 t-shirts per day times $28. But
27:00
then she have to subtract the $8. So her
27:03
net profit, her mean profit that she
27:07
expects to make is $59.76.
27:12
Okay, but here's the tricky part. When
27:14
it comes to standard deviation, addition
27:16
and subtraction do not affect standard
27:19
deviation. So, we're going to take the
27:21
1.258. We're going to multiply it by 28.
27:24
But addition or subtraction of a
27:27
constant does not affect measures of
27:30
spread, including range, standard
27:31
deviation, and IQR. Now, we're not
27:33
dealing with range and IQR. I know that,
27:35
but we are dealing with standard
27:36
deviation. So, when we're going to
27:37
convert this, we are not going to
27:39
subtract, but we are going to multiply.
27:40
1.258 258 time 28, we get that same $35.
27:45
This would be the mean and the suviation
27:47
for the profit. That same situation we
27:49
got earlier of $35. Boy, I can't type
27:52
tonight. Okay, so it's $3522.
27:58
Okay, so just a little thing you want to
28:00
remember is that when you are converting
28:01
means and standard deviations,
28:03
multiplication of a constant and
28:05
addition or subtraction of a constant
28:07
affect the mean. But when it comes to
28:09
standard deviation, only multiplication,
28:11
not addition or subtraction of a
28:13
constant affect the standard deviation.
28:15
All right, that's it for talking about
28:16
the parameters, which are the mean and
28:18
standard deviation of a random variable.
28:20
For discrete, we got these formulas or
28:21
we have desmos that could do it all
28:22
really, really quickly for us. And for
28:25
continuous, we're just going to be given
28:26
to them. But the most important thing
28:27
that you know how to do is interpreting
28:29
those values in context and really
28:31
understanding what they are and what
28:32
they represent. All right, see you in
28:34
the next video.

2.10
Hey stat stars, welcome to AP Statistics. In this video, we'll be covering topic 2.10 over the binomial distribution. If you haven't already, be sure to download the guided notes that accompany this lesson from the ultimate review packet for AP Statistics. There's a link in the description below. The guided notes will help you follow along and build a complete set of notes for the course. In this video, we will cover what the binomial distribution is and how once you know it, it will make calculating some tough probabilities pretty easy. As always, we'll begin by learning the key concepts and skills for this topic, and then we'll finish with AP style practice problems to help you apply what we've learned. Let's get started. And always remember, one topic at a time, one step closer to a five. So, before we dive too deep into the binomial distribution, we first have to understand what a binomial random variable is. A binomial random variable is a very specific type of discrete random variable. So, let's quickly remind ourselves what a discrete random variable is. So a random variable is the result of a random process is a numerical value. So it starts off with what we're going to be looking at today is random process meaning we don't know what the outcome is but the outcomes are listable numerical values. Discrete means listable and random variable means numerical values. So don't get overly confused this binomial random variable is this crazy brand new thing. It's really not. It's something that we've been working with a lot. It's just a very special type that we're going to talk about exactly how it becomes special in this video. But at the end of the day, it's simply a random process where the outcome is a listable numerical value. Now, here's the official definition of a binomial random variable. It's a little bit confusing, but let me read it anyway. A binomial random variable X, remember we typically use capital letters to represent random variable, is a discrete random variable that counts the number of successes in repeated independent trials that have only two possible outcomes, success or failure with the probability of success P and the probability of failure being one minus P. So the idea is that a binomial random variable, the outcomes are the number of successes that you could have in a set number of n trials. N just being a placeholder for how many. So for example, let's just say that Doug has a 15% chance of hitting a bullseye with a dart. And we know automatically that if he has a 15% chance of success that's hitting the bullseye, then the complement would be the 85% which would be one minus P. And that is where we get failure. And if he shoots, let's say five bullse eyes or excuse me, five darts, he's going to shoot five darts. The random variable, the binomial random variable is how many successes he has, how many times he will successfully hit the bullseye. So, if he has a set number of darts, five darts, he could hit all five of them. That'd be awesome, right? He could hit four of them. He could hit three of them. He could hit two of them. He could hit one of them, or oh my gosh, he could hit zero of them. He can't hit a negative amount. That doesn't make sense. He can't hit more than five because he's only shooting five darts. And he can't hit a decimal amount because how do you have 3.6 bullse eyes? That doesn't make sense. So again, this is discrete random variable. The outcomes are listable numerical values and those outcomes represent the number of successes that he could have in n trials and every trial the probability of success is 15% and then failure would be the opposite of that 85%. Now the other key thing here is we have to have what are called independent trials which means that what happens on one trial doesn't change the next. It's not like there's any conditional probabilities going on here where you say, well, if he hits the first two bullse eyes, then the probability of hitting him the third bullseye will go up to 90%. No, none of that happens. The probability of success stays the same. So, that is a binomial random variable described pretty quickly. Now, let's break it down a little bit deeper. There is a way that we could make sure that we have a binomial random variable. And there's four things that we have to check. And all four of these things are in that definition, but we're just going to break it down individually. The first is that every trial has to be what we call binary, meaning that it could either be a successful trial or a fail. Only two things can happen on every trial. What we want to happen or it doesn't happen. So that's it. It's got to be binary. That's why it's called a binomial random variable. The second thing is that those trials have to be independent. There could be no conditional probabilities here. Well, if this happens, then that happens. But if this happens, then this goes down. No, none of that. It has to be independent trials, which means what happens on one trial, success or fail has no bearing on the next changing or being uh higher or lower. And then the third thing is we have to be given a set number of trials, right? Because we need to figure out how many successes we could have in n trials. So n the number of trials must be given to us because otherwise it would just go on forever and ever. And the fourth and final thing is that the probability of success whatever it is given to you in the problem we call that P. Well, it has to stay the same. It cannot change from trial to trial to trial. And that means the probability of failure which is the opposite or the complement of the probability of success must also stay the same. Now one way we could remember this is using an acronym. We could remember B for binary, I for independent, T for number of trials and S for probability stays the same. So if we remember the acronym bits Bit Ts, we can remember the four things that we have to check to make sure we have a binomial random variable. All right, let's look at a couple of examples. This first one says McKenzie makes 78% of her free throws. If she shoots eight free throws, let the random variable M be how many she makes. So the question we have to answer is the random variable M a binomial random variable? Well, let's check our bits first. Is it binary? every shot she's either going to make the free throw or she's going to miss it. It's either going to be success it goes in or failure it does not. That's definitely binary. Independent means that there's no conditional probabilities. It's 78% every single time. It's not like if she makes the first, the probability goes up and if she misses the first, the probability goes down. So, we have independent trials. And then t is a set number of trials must be given. In this case, we were told we have eight trials. So, we're going to either make all eight free throws, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, or no free throws. Those are the only outcomes for this discrete random variable. And then lastly, we have S. The probability must stay the same. So, we can't have any assumption like there's no hot streaks like, oh, McKenzie made four in a row. Now, the probability is going to change to 80% or 85%. Nope. The probability of success must stay the same. So, this would be considered a binomial random variable. How about the second one? Kayla makes 80% of her free throws, but if she makes any one free throw, the probability the next one is a make increases by 2%. So if she makes the first, then the next one's 82%, then she makes that one, then it goes 84%. But if she misses a free throw, it drops down 10%. She shoots 10 free throws, let the random variable K be how many she makes. All right, is this binomial? Well, first let's check our bits. Binomial? Yes, it either goes in or it goes out. independent. Do we have independent trials? And that is where we fail because we have some conditional probabilities. If she makes a free throw, it goes up 2%. If she misses a free throw, it goes down 10%. That violates independence. That means what happens on any one trial impacts the next and that violates the rules for binomial random variable. This is still a random variable, but it's not going to be a binomial random variable. So, sorry, this doesn't meet the requirements. Also failing is the S that stays the same. The probability certainly does not stay the same. We're literally telling you that it's going to change. All right, let's look at a third sample or a third example. In a small bag of 20 candies, 25% are red. Okay, 20 candies, 25% are red means that there are five red candies. Five out of 20 is 25%. If five candies were selected without replacement, let R be the random variable for how many candies are red. Okay, let's check our bit our bits. Is it binary? Yes, the cand is either red or it's not red. So, that checks out. Is it independent? Does the probability stay the same? And does each trial not have to do with the next? Well, this is where we run into a problem again. It says we're selecting without replacement. So, that means the first time I reach into the bag, there are five out of 20 red, which is 25%. Now, the next time I reach in, the probability is changing, right? Because if I got a red one, well, now there's only four red left out of 19 that are left in total because I did not replace it. So, 4 / 19 is 21 1%. So, the probability clearly changed. Now, it's 21.1%. And then, even if I did not get a red, well, that means there's still five red ones left out of 19. So again, the probability is still changing even if I did not get a red one. So five out of 19 is still 26.3%. So now the probability went up to 26.3%. So we also violate the probabilities are not staying the same and that means they're not independent. So what happens on this very first selection could impact the next or the next and so on and so on. So again, this is not a binomial random variable. Now, this next example is going to be very similar with a little bit of twist that will make it binomial. So, just hear me out on this one. At the candy factory, there's a batch of millions of candies. 25% are red. Okay, so 25% of millions. Well, I don't even know what that'd be because it doesn't tell me the exact number, but it would be a lot, right? Okay. So, if five candies are selected without replacement, let R be the random variable for how many candies are red. Okay. Is it binary? Yes. It's either going to be red or it's not going to be red. Now, do we have independence? Well, this is where it's a little bit tricky. Yes and no. Oh, hear me out. I know that's weird. All right, let's just say there was exactly 1 million candies. I know it said millions, but let's just say there's 1 million. Okay, so if there's 1 million candies, try to make sure I get all my zeros here. Okay, I think that's 1 million. That means 250,000 of them are red. And that would be the 25%. All right. Now, let's just say that we do get a red marble. Like, we pick out a red marble. It says without replacement, so we don't put it back. Well, now there's 999,000 999. Okay, whatever. You get the idea. There's 9999,000 marbles left. And then how many of them are red? Well, 2 49, 999. So, has the proportion of red marbles technically changed? Yes. But if you do the math on that 2499999 divided by 9999999 it is.2499999999999. So technically has it dropped right it's no longer 25% it's a little bit different but it's so close that we say that it's negligible meaning it's not that big of a difference. So again, has independence been violated? Yes, because I got a red marble on the first selection and the probability of the next one being red changed a little bit, but it didn't change enough. See, up here, it changed significant. It went from 25% to 21.1%. That is a noticeable change that violates independence. But here, it's not a big enough change. We actually have something called the 10% condition we'll talk a little bit more about later on. But the idea is if the number you take out is less than 10% of the population, you are still violating independence, but it's not a big enough deal that it's going to really matter and we could still proceed with a binomial random variable. Now, again, did we check our bits? We So, we're going to go do the t for trials. We were told that we have five candies. That's our n. And then the probability of su success again technically it's not staying the same but it's it's a negligible difference because again it's so many even millions. So even if we made that 2 million or 3 million it's even going to be a smaller change. So even though we're taking red ones out the probability is pretty much staying the same which is okay. It's not exact but it's okay. And again that's something called the 10% condition that we're going to talk a lot more about later. All right. So now let's talk about actually some examples here because now that we understand what a binomial random variable looks like and we understand the outcomes of that binomial random variable or how many successes that you could have in n trials. Now what we want to do is talk about calculating probabilities for a binomial random variable. And this is going to get a little bit confusing before it gets really really easy. So just bear with me here. All right let's go back to Mackenzie. Mackenzie makes 78% of her free throws if she shoots eight free throws. Let the random variable M be how many she makes. We want to construct a probability distribution. Now remember a probability distribution is going to be a list of all of the outcomes. And since binomial is discreet, we can make that list, but we also have to have all of the probabilities of those outcomes. And that's what we got to start teaching you right now. So first off, here is the list of all of those outcomes. If she shoots eight free throws, how many can she make? Zero 1 2 3 4 5 six seven eight or that's it. Can't make nine. Can't make 10. is only shooting eight and can't make decimals, can't make negatives. You get the idea. All right. Now, what we want to do is start breaking down how to calculate each of the probabilities. And this is where we're going to have to use some of our probability rules, especially what's called the general multiplication rule because she's shooting multiple free throws. We're going to need to multiply. So, let's start with the very first outcome of zero. All right. What's the probability she makes zero free throws? Well, there are her eight shots, and we need all of them to be failures. Every single one of them is a failure. fail, fail, fail, fail, fail, fail, fail, fail. You get the idea. Now, what's the probability of failure? Well, if there's a 78% chance she makes it, there's a 22% chance she misses it. So, we have a 22% chance that she misses the first, 22% chance she misses the second, and so on. All those probabilities stay the same. They don't change. They don't go up, they don't go down. That's why it's 22% the entire time. We do have independence, which means if she makes she misses five in a row, it's still 22%. Now, how do we calculate the probability of this? Well, it's the general multiplication rule because we need this to happen and then this and then this and then this and then this and then this and then this and then this. So, we're just simply going to multiply 22 times itself eight times. But we could use exponents to make that a lot easier. So, if we do 22 raised to the eth, that's repeated multiplication, we get our probability of 0.0000549, which means it's extremely unlikely that she misses all the free throws. And that makes sense because she's actually a pretty good free throw shooter. She makes 78% of them. So, she shouldn't miss all of them. But it's not impossible, but it's very, very unlikely. Now, I do want to present this to you in a slightly different way. It's very similar, but slightly different because it's going to help us later on when we start to look at a formula for doing this. All right, here's another way that we could think about this probability. Now, we have to think about all of her eight shots, and we have to think about both successes and fails. Now, what we just talked about is the fact that she has eight failures. She literally misses every single shot. That means that there are no successes. So, I really don't need this 78 to the 0ero. And you guys should know that anything raised to zero is one. And when you multiply by one, it does nothing. So, I don't really need that. But, I want to make sure we're accounting for how many successes there are and how many failures there are. She's missing all of them. So, she has eight failures, which means she has zero successes. And this one represents the fact there's only one way this can happen. And here's it. We're looking at it right now. All eight are failure. You can't switch any of those around and have it look different. All eight failures is all eight failures. There's only one way that can happen. Now, you might be like, why did you do that? Well, you'll see here in this next example. All right, let's talk about the probability she makes one of them. For example, maybe she misses, misses, misses. There's our success. The four shot is our success. And then another four misses. That end result is her making one. Now, what's the probability of that? Well, we have to break down each shot. So, we have 22% 22% 22% and then the success 78% and then another fail 22 22 22 22. Again, we can use exponents to make this a little bit faster. So, this is where we have 78 raised to the 1st for her one success. 22 raised to the 7th for her 1, two, three, four, five, six, seven failures. So again, that's me multiplying this out for this one scenario. But the problem is this. Yes, this is the probability of this one very very specific um outcome where she makes the fourth. The one shot she makes is the fourth shot. But what about it being the second shot? Technically, this is a different scenario where she makes her one make is the second shot. Now the good news is that the probability still stays the same because when you're multiplying order does not matter. So at the end of the day we still have one success 78 to the 1st and seven failures. But this scenario right here where the second shot is her make is different than this scenario where it was the fourth shot. So the idea is how many different scenarios are there? Well, there ends up being eight of them because she can make the first, miss all the others, make the second, miss all the others, make the third, miss all the others, and all the way down the line. So, there's eight different scenarios. But here's the good news. They all have the same probability because they all have one make, seven misses. And when you multiply that out, no matter the order, you get 0.0000195. So now we got to put all of this together to get the total probability she makes one shot. Here it is. So she makes one shot. So we need 78%. We need 7 22%. But there's eight different ways that this can happen. So there's three parts to this formula for the probability. How many successes there are, that's our P, probability of success. How many failures there are, that's the one minus P, the failure. And then how many different combinations there are, right? I'm gonna put combos there. How many different combos there? Like meaning if she makes one shot, how many different ways can that happen? Well, again, which one is the make? This one or this one or this one or this one or this one or this one or this one or this one? There's eight different ways. Now, back when we did zero makes, all seven misses. Well, there's only one way that could happen, which is why I wrote it that way for you. All right, so hopefully this is starting to be processed a little bit. But now let's move on and keep going and looking at two shots. She makes two shots. What's the probability she makes two shots? Okay, so here is one combination, one option for this. She makes the second and she makes the six. Okay, all the others are failures. Now, what would this look like probability-wise? Well, let's use exponents to speed it up a little bit. We have 78 to the 2 for her two makes and 2 to the six for her one two three four five six failures. Again we have to have all eight shots accounted for and if two of them are makes six of them are failures. Now I don't remember multiplication I don't have to multiply in order. So yes officially it's 222* 78*22*22*22* 78*22*22. But it's okay if I do it out of order because multiplication says that. But now we got to think about the fact that there are other options like this one was making the second making the sixth. What about this one where she makes the third and she makes the eight. This is a different scenario but it ends in that same outcome of two made shots. Now again probability good news order doesn't matter. So the probability is the same as the previous example but it is different. We still have two makes and we still have six misses. All right. All right. So now what we got to do is figure out how many different outcomes are there for making two shots. See that's where it gets tricky. Like maybe this is the make right here and this is the make. Now again the probability would still be 78^2*2 to the 6, but it is a different outcome. Well, there ends up being 28 of them. There are 28 different outcomes. I'm not going to walk you all through all of them because you're going to get very bored. But the good news is all 28 of those outcomes have the same probability of two makes, six misses, and there's that final probability. So now we're going to get back to our final answer. Again, this is going to be this is going to be coming from a formula. So that's why I'm kind of going in a nice organized way here. So we have two makes, that's our probability of success. Six misses, that's our probability of failure. And then we have the 28 is how many different combos there are. There are 28 different combinations. Now, one thing you might be wondering to yourself right now is how the heck did you know there were 28 different combinations? Well, one thing you could do is literally walk through them all. Okay? Could be the first and the second, could be the first and the third, could be the first and the fourth, could be the fourth and the eighth, and then you drive yourself crazy trying to think of them all. But we have a shortcut. Now, hear me out. I'm about to show you the shortcut to figure out the number of combos. You're not going to like it. The math is a little bit weird and you might not even recognize some of this math. But don't worry because I'm going to show you how your calculator could do all of it for you. So don't stress over this. But this goes back to something that you might have learned, I don't even know, back in another class over combinations. A combination is the number of ways to choose x items from a set of n items where the order of selection does not matter. Now, there's actually two different ways that we mathematically notate this. We could use this right here where we're saying, okay, in our case, we have eight shots. We want to choose two of them to be makes. How many different combinations are there? Or another way we can notate it is with these giant parenthesis where we do eight shots on top. How many different ways can we choose two of them to be makes? And then we use this crazy formula with these factorials. If you don't know what a factorial is, like for example, 8 factorial is 8 * 7 * 6 * 5 * 4 * 3 * 2 * 1. Now again, don't stress because you're not going to have to use this formula. I promise. But it's going to end up looking like this. For our example, we have eight shots and we want to see how many different ways two of them could be successful. If you put it all into this formula, you get you do get 28. But listen to me, do not stress. You will never ever need this formula. Desmos comes to the rescue because you are allowed to use Desmos on the exam. So if you go to Desmos and you pull up the keyboard and you go to functions at the very literally the very very bottom is NCR. So in parenthesis you're going to type in the number of trials you have in this case eight comma 2. That's how many successes we want. And look right there it gives you 28. So that's how we could figure out there are 28 successes in eight 28 combinations where you have two successes in eight trials. Now I'm going to make this even easier for you in a couple minutes. So do not stress. All right. So that is how we can figure this out. Now let's actually use this formula to speed up this process. How many different ways can she make three shots? What's the probability she makes three shots? Okay, here's one option where she makes three shots. And again, the probability be 78 to the 3, three makes, and then 22 to the fifth for her five misses. Because if she makes three, she must miss five. But what we want to figure out is how many different combinations there are. We want to figure out what is eight choose three. How many different ways if you have eight shots, could three of them be successful? Well, again, all you got to do is use Desmos. Don't stress over using a formula. So again, we're just going to go all the way down on that functions tab and we're going to do 8, 3, hit enter, and there it is. 56 different combinations. So now we're going to come back here and we're going to get our answer. So we have 78 to the 3. That's for the three makes. That's what we needed. 22 to the 5th. Again, 8 minus 3 is five. If you have eight shots and three of them are makes and the other five have to be misses. And then this simply tells you how many combos there are, which we just figured out on Desmos is 56. So there's 56 different scenarios that result in three makes. All of those scenarios have the same probability of 78 the 3r* 2 to the 5th. Multiply all that out and we get the probability. All right, what about the probability of four makes? Now, I'm going to go through this a lot faster because we know the process. So, first we have how many different combos there are. Eight choose four. That's going to tell you how many different combinations there are. We have four makes, which means we have four misses. And then we pro calculate all that out. We could use our calculator to do the 8 choose four part. And then we get 00607. Now, just keep watching this video. Please don't stop now because I'm going to make it even easier here. All right. What about five makes? Well, same thing. 8 choose five. Five makes, which means there's three misses. Multiply all that out, we get.172. Just make sure that you truly understand the three parts. This is the number of combos there are that result in five makes. This is the number of successes P and this is the number of failures one minus P. All right. Now, let's do six. Well, 8 choose 6, that's the number of combos. 78 raised to the 6 times.22 race to the second makes six miss 2305. That's actually pretty likely. Remember she's a good free throw shooter. So she should make six free throws. And what about the probability she makes seven? Well again 8 choose 7.78 raised to the 7th time 22 raised to 1. Seven makes one miss. 8 choose 7 is how many combos there are and we get 309. And one more thing I want to comment. If you don't want to use this notation, you could use the big C notation like that. Now, statistically in AP stats, this is the notation we prefer. But again, you're not even using the formula. You're just using your calculator anyway. All right. And the last one, eight makes. She makes every single one of them. Well, again, this would be eight choose eight. Eight shots. All eight of them are successful. Now, that is only one way that can happen. Success, success, success, success, success, success, success, success. You get the idea. And then all eight are makes 78 race the eth. And then we have 22 raised to zero because if she made eight of them, then she missed none of them. And our final probability there is 0.137. So here is the final probability distribution with literally all of the outcomes listed and all of the connected probabilities that we just showed you how to calculate. Now that we understand the process, let's look at a generic formula. Here is the formula for binomial probability. This first part is the number of combinations there are. Again, I call them combos. How many different combos are there? Now, remember, you don't have to know that crazy formula. The calculator will do it for you, but N is the set number of trials you have. X is the number of successes you're looking for. Then you have your successes. P is the probability of success. It's going to be raised to X, the number of successes you want to happen. Then you have your failures. One minus P is the probability of failure. And that's going to be raised to the N minus X. Now, where do we get N minus X from? Well, for example, if we have eight trials and we want to make three, well, eight minus three means there would be five failures. So, if you do n minus x, that should tell you how many failures you have. Most kids are just going to figure that out in their head. But that is the formula for the binomial function. This is going to calculate the probability of each individual outcome in a binomial formula. Now, here's the best part. This formula is awesome. I love it. You need to know it and understand it, and hopefully this video is doing that for you. But there's also cheats that could do all of that math for you, which is going to come in super handy on multiple choice questions or even free response questions where you just have to get the answer. Is there are cheats on the numeric calculator or there's cheats on the TID4 calculator and there's also cheats on Desmos that could do all the work for you. And I want to walk you through another example where we do all of that for you on Desmos. And you're going to love it. It's going to be so easy. All right, but there's one more thing I want to teach you before we dive into some examples. Let's now talk about the parameters of a binomial random uh binomial random variable. Now remember the pi the parameters are the mean and the standard deviation if the random variable were to be repeated a large number of times. So if we were to repeat repeat repeat this scenario, the average or the mean or the expected value is what we would expect in the long run. And this is a really really easy formula. N* P. Think about McKenzie for a second. if she were to shoot eight free throws over and over again, shoot eight, shoot eight, shoot eight, shoot eight. And maybe she did it multiple times day after day after day after day and she kept a journal and every day she wrote how many she made of those eight. N* P is just going to be the average in the long run. It's going to be the average of all those trials. So if we have eight shots and the probability of success is 78, 8 time 78 means that on average we would expect her to make 6.24 free throws. Now, in any one trial of shooting eight free throws, she's never going to make 6.24. It's impossible. She can make six, she can make seven. But listen, it's the average. It's what we expect to happen in the long run. So, if you know, before McKenzie steps up and shoots eight free throws, I would expect her to shoot 6.24 um makes in the long run. Okay, pretty simple. Then we have the standard deviation. Well, because guess what? This 6.24 is going to vary. Some days she might make more out of eight. Some days she might make less. So the formula here is n * p * 1 minus p. So what we're going to do in our square root here is we're going to do 8 * 78 *22 the probability of failure. So don't forget that square root 8 * 78 *22 is 1.17. So yes, we expect her to make 6.24 free throws, but sometimes she could make a little bit more, she could make a little bit less. So make sure you understand these, but be very careful. These formulas right here only work if you are a binomial random variable. They don't work for any other discrete random variable. Only binomial random variables. All right. Now, let's dive into a full example. And I'm going to show you how your calculator is going to do so much of it for you. All right. Worldwide, 13% of people are left-handed. In a random group of 20 people, let h be the number of left-handed people. Now, the first thing we're going to do is make sure it's binomial. So, let's check all of our rules. First, it's binary. A random person is either going to be left-handed or they're not. It's independence. If I'm left-handed, that's not going to make the next person any more or less likely to be left-handed. And we're talking about a population of millions of people in the world. So, if I take out 20 of them, yes, maybe I'm technically violating independence, but it's not that big of a deal. It's kind of like our our candy problem. There's millions of candies and you take out five. Yes, the probability might not still be 25%, but it's going to be really really close where it doesn't matter. Now, we were also told a number of trials, 20 people, n equals 20. And the probability of success must stay the same. It's not like 13% is contagious where if one person's left-handed, they're going to spread it to the next and the next and the next. You get the idea. All right. Now, let's answer some questions. What is the probability that exactly six people are left-handed? Well, yes, let's use our formula, right? We just taught you how to use the formula here. So, what's the probability of six left-handed people? Well, first is the number of combinations. How many different combos are there? All right. Well, what six people are left-handed? Well, there's lots of different scenarios. Well, 20 choose six is going to tell them for us. Then we have our success, which we need to raise it to the six because we need six left-handed people. That means the other 14 people are all failures. And that's 1 minus P and 1 minus 13 or 1 -.13 is 87. So, we get 00266. Now, what I want to show you is you don't have to calculate this out. You don't have to go to your calculator, figure out the combos. You don't have to do any multiplication here. You do need to understand this formula and why it is what it is. But watch this. This is the amazement of Desmos. All right. If we go to Desmos here, I'm going to clear this out. All right. If we click on this little plus button right here and we go to inference at the very top is probability distributions. Now, there's a drop-own menu here and we need to find binomial. There it is right there. Now, it's going to ask you for two things. The probability, no, sorry, not the probability. It's going to ask you for the number of trials, ed, in this case, 20 people. And it's going to ask us for the probability of success, 0.13. Those are the only two things it needs. Another reason why it's called the binomial model, because there's only two things you need. All right, hit create distribution. Now, the first off, look at this picture. Look how cool this is. This is literally the probability distribution. All you got to do is click on each dot. So, this first dot would be zero people are left-handed, and right next to it is the probability. This next dot is one person and the probability. Then two people, three people, four people, five people. And here's what we were asked for. The probability that there are six left-handed people is 0.0266. All we had to do was find that dot. So it's literally building you a distribution. So look at what we see here. We see that there's a higher probability of, you know, one, two, three, four left-handed people. That's all kind of likely. But the more people that are left-handed gets more and more unlikely. For example, the probability that there are 18 left-handed people is extremely low. Now, they just put a zero here. It's technically not zero, but it's like 0 0. That it might as well be zero. It's very, very unlikely. All right, so we go back to it. That's how easy it is to get the 00266. So, yes, you have to understand this formula, but you don't have to use it. You could use your calculator. All right, let's do another one here where it might get a little bit tricky. What is the probability of at least one left-handed person? Okay, so at least one means one or more. So 20 people, we could have anywhere from zero lefties, 1, two, three, four, 18 lefties, 19 lefties, or 20 lefties, right? There are a lot of outcomes, but they are still listable. Now, at least one means that we want to add or we want to combine all of these, right? We want to do at least one. One or more. We got to find that probability. So, one thing we could do that we're not going to do, but one thing we could do is calculate the probability of zero. Oh, excuse me. Excuse me. Sorry. Calculate the probability of one, then calculate the probability of two, then calculate the probability of three, then calculate the probability of four, and then basically add them all together. So, I actually go back to this model here. I could find the probabilities of everything except for zero, not zero. find the probability of 1 2 3 4 5 6 all the way up to 20, which again is pretty low, basically zero, and then add them all together and I'll get my answer. But there's an easier way. The only outcome I don't want to happen is zero. So if I find the probability of zero and then do one minus that probability, I'll get with everything else. Again, I want one all the way up to 20. So if I just do zero and then do one minus 0, I will find the probability very very quickly. So again, here's me showing my work for zero. Here's the number of combinations for zero successes. Zero successes, all 20 failures. Here's that probability. And oh yeah, don't worry. We could get that right here. Remember that was right here. The probability of zero was 00617. And then now I'm going to do one minus that because I don't want zero successes. I want everything other than zero successes. So if I do one minus that, I'll get my answer a lot faster. N383. All right, let's do another one here. What is the probability of at most four? All right, what does at most four mean? That means four or less. That' be four or three or two or one or zero. That's the probability of at most four. I do not want five. I do not want six. I do not want seven. I do not want eight. So again, one thing I could do is just go to Desmos here. Click on zero, one, two, three, and four and add those probabilities together. At most four means four or less. So, I'm going to add those probabilities together and I'll get my answer. But there's an even easier way. Check this out. On the left hand side here, once you created that binomial distribution, click on cumulative probability. This allows you to look in between two values, outside of two values, to the left of a value, or to the right of a value. So, I want to do four or less. So, if I click on left, which is to the left or less, and then notice what it says. It says X less than or equal, and I'm going to type in a four there. And boom, there's the answer. 892. So, it could do, you know, using this little feature over here, it could do above, below, in between, or even outside. So, at most four means four or less. So, I'm choosing left. And notice it even highlighted those four things for me. The zero, the one, the two, the three, and the four. and it's going to add them all together for me. So that means I could get my answer very, very quickly with literally showing no work. 08 0 892. All right, let's do another one like that. What is the probability of at least three? Okay, at least three means three or more. Anything greater than or equal to three. So I'm going to go ahead and use this awesome feature here on the left. I'm going to hit write and that means greater than or equal. I'm going to type in a three there. So it literally says what I'm looking for x greater than or equal to 3 and we get 492. So, just make sure that you do a couple things, right? Even though we're using the calculator to get our answer for us, we still have to be able to properly notate what it is we're looking for. We're trying to find the probability that the number of left-handed people is greater than or equal to three. And our answer is 0492. But we got to make sure we notate that answer. So, don't just blindly give 492. I guess in multiple choice, you could do that. But we also have to understand what we're representing there with our answer. All right, let's do one more thing here. what is the mean and standard deviation and interpret them in context. So what this means is we want to find the parameters. So if we were to look at 20 people and write down how many of them are left-handed, look at another 20 people, write down how many of them are left-handed, look at another 20 people, write down how many of them are left-handed, and do this repeatedly, the mean for the random variable H would be how many of those people are going to be left-handed in the long run. Okay, so pretty easy formulas here that we already showed you. These formulas only work if you are working with a binomial random distribution. So we're going to take 20 *.13 and we get 2.6. That means we expect 2.6 left-handed people in a group of 20. But that number could vary. It could be a little more, could be a little bit less because well everything in the world varies. So now we're going to calculate the standard deviation by taking 20 times.13 times the failure rate 87. And don't forget that giant square root and we get 1.504. So if in a group of 20 people, I would expect an average of 2.6 left-handed people, but that number of left-handed people could vary by 1.504. So that's exactly how you would interpret it. The formulas are pretty easy, but make sure to interpret. Now, on the formula sheet for the AP statistics will be given those formulas for you. They will give you these formulas right here for the parameters of a binomial random variable. And they will also give you this formula right here that shows you how to calcul calculate the probabilities even though I showed you how Desmos could do so much of it for you really really easy. All right, I know it's a long video, but hope it was a really good description of the binomial distribution and how to calculate probabilities inside of it.

2.11
Hey statsars, welcome to AP Statistics. In this video, we'll be covering topic 2.11, part one over the normal distribution. If you haven't already, be sure to download the guided notes that accompany this lesson from the ultimate review packet for AP Statistics. There's a link in the description below. The guided notes will help you follow along and build a complete set of notes for the course. In this video, we will cover what the normal distribution is and how it will make calculating probabilities for continuous random variables so easy. And it's hands down the most used probability distribution in the world. So get ready. As always, we'll begin by learning the key concepts and skills for the topic and then we'll finish with AP style practice problems to help you apply what we've learned. Let's get started. And remember, one topic at a time, one step closer to a five. So we are going to dive into the normal distribution. Perhaps one of the most important topics of all of AP statistics in my opinion. But it all starts with us talking about what the heck a continuous random variable is. A continuous random variable is a variable that can take on any value within a specified domain. So remember, a random variable is the outcome of a random process is a numerical value. A continuous random variable means that that value, the numerical value I'm talking about, could take on literally any value with decimals included inside of a specified domain. So every interval within the domain has a probability associated with it. So when we talk about that a continuous random variable, there's lots of different possibilities for that random variable and every interval of possibilities has a probability associated with it. Now let's look at an example because I think an example is going to help this make a lot more sense. So let B equal the amount of time in seconds an adult brushes their teeth in the morning. This is definitely continuous random variable. I mean how long it could take you to brush your teeth in seconds, especially if you've got a good stopwatch. boy, it could be like 10.35 seconds, 10.36 seconds if you brush your teeth real short or it could be 199.6 seconds or 205.7 seconds. This is definitely continuous random variable. So for example, some particular intervals we could look at because remember there's a probability associated with every interval of a continuous random variable. So here we're looking at the probability. So P for probability that the amount of time it takes an adult to brush their teeth is less than 100 seconds. Or here's another one. We're looking for the probability that the amount of time it takes you to brush your teeth is somewhere between 60 and 120 seconds. And one more. What's the probability that the amount of time it takes you to brush your teeth is greater than 150 seconds? See, each one of these is an interval of values for that random variable. And every one of these has a probability associated with it. Now, the one thing we cannot do with a continuous random variable is calculate the exact value of one specific outcome. So if we said, hey, what's the probability that it will take you exactly 100 seconds to brush your teeth? Unfortunately, we cannot calculate that. When it comes to continuous random variables, we can only find probabilities with associated intervals of that continuous random variable. Now, how do we find these probabilities? Well, we're going to need to look at a probability distribution. So, here's a probability distribution for the amount of time B in seconds it takes an adult to brush her teeth in the morning. Now what we notice is a skewed right distribution meaning most adults take somewhere between 60 70 80 90 seconds to brush your teeth. It is very rare very unrealistic just very unlikely for it to take 130 150 160 seconds to brush your teeth. So the higher we go the more unlikely it is or the lower the probability is. So we see this with a beautiful curve. We actually call this a density curve. It's a curve that models the probability. underneath the curve is 100% or all of the possibilities. But then we could look at intervals. So example, we see that from 70 to 80 where it's quite high. That's where it's going to be more likely because it's higher. From 150 to 160, it's a lot lower. That's going to be less likely. So for example, one of our questions was, hey, what's the probability that the amount of time it takes to brush your teeth is less than 100 seconds. So what we do is we put a line at 100 seconds and then we look at the area underneath it. So the entire area underneath the the entire curve is 100%. So we just have to figure out what area is under 100 seconds that I highlighted here in blue. So I don't know, maybe you could say, you know, maybe that's about 65% of the entire area. You kind of have to eyeball it. Here's that second one we looked at. We said, what's the probability that the amount of time it takes an adult to brush your teeth is somewhere between 60 and 120 seconds? So we put a line at 60 line 120 and we look at that area in between and we try to figure out okay what fraction or what proportion of the overall area is in that shaded region and I don't know maybe 87% again I'm just spitballing but that is the answer. So if I decide that that area was about 87% of the whole area then that means about 87% of adults spent between 60 and 120 seconds to brush their teeth. And here is our final question. We said what about the probability that the amount of time is greater than 150 seconds. So we look at 150 seconds and we shade that very very very very very very very very small area above it. And then we say okay what proportion of the entire density curve what proportion of all the area under that curve is greater than 150. I would say very low maybe 5%. Again I'm just kind of making that up but again that's the idea. every particular interval for that continuous random variable does have a probability associated and we have to use a curve like this to figure that out. Now let's look at a different example and this is where things are going to get really really powerful. Let W equal the weight in pounds of adult male line. Now if we have a really good scale maybe we can get to two or three decimal places. So this is definitely continuous random variable. I mean the weight of a male line could be 502.67 pounds, 514.91 pounds. I mean there is a whole continuous list of possibilities for the weight in pounds of an adult male lion. But again, we know based on what we're talking about with continuous random variables is that every interval for this continuous random variable does have a probability associated. For example, what is the probability that the weight is less than 390? That's an interval. All values less than 390. The probability that a weight is somewhere between 400 and 470. Again, that's an interval of values. And what's the probability that the weight is greater than 500? Again, that's another interval. Remember, the one thing we cannot do is calculate the probability of an exact value. So, if I said, what's the probability that adult male lion weighs exactly 593.6 pounds? Well, sorry, we cannot calculate that probability. We can only find probabilities associated with intervals within that continuous random variable. All right, so let's look at another density curve. So, here's another density curve. Now, this one is much more beautifully symmetric. We got a tail to the left and a tail to the right. Definitely not skewed right like that previous one we saw. But again, every interval inside of this has a probability associated with it. And the height again underneath this curve is 100% of lions. And we see that there is a larger majority, larger proportion, larger probability that they're around 410 to 450, 450 to 490. Over 470 below 330 is again going to be more and more unlikely. Now, one of the questions we posed you earlier was, what's the probability that the weight is less than 390? So, all we got to do is put a line roughly where 390 is and look at the area below it. And right now, we just kind of have to spitball like I don't I don't know, maybe 10%, I don't know. I'm just kind of thinking and again, we're not going to be thinking later. We're not going to be spitballing later. We're going to be getting exact answers. Just stick with me. Here was another one. We said, "Hey, what's the area or what's the probability, excuse me, that adult male line weighs between 400 and 470?" We put a line roughly where 400 is. Another line at 470. We look at that area in between and maybe we estimate that to be 51%. And then another example we saw earlier as well was what is the probability that a adult male lion weighs more than 500 lb. We put a line at 500 lb. And again, we look at that area above. That area above the proportion of the entire area that that shaded region is is going to answer our question about that probability. Now that is all a beautiful hopefully pretty good description of a continuous random variable and how we make a number line for all of the options for that continuous random variable. And then again the density curve is just showing us where there is more likely where is the probability higher for that particular weight. Now one thing you might be asking is like does this go lower? Yes, sure this density curve can keep going lower and lower and lower. Heck it could go all the way down to zero pounds but that would be very very unlikely. You're not going to find an adult male line that weighs one or pound or two pounds or zero pounds. That's just not possible. This is where the biggest bulk of them is. We see that kind of I guess a bubble or a hump where we see the majority of adult male lions. Now, this is all great. This is all awesome. We've been learning about continuous random variables. Hopefully, it all makes sense. But here's where it gets good. There is a particular curve that's called the normal distribution. And many continuous random variables are well modeled by a normal distribution. So this one right here that we saw earlier was what we saw a skewed right distribution. Again lots of things out there are skewed right where there's more data on the left less data on the right. Okay. But there's also a lot of data a lot a ton of data in fact that is considered normal. And that is exactly what this is. This weight of an adult male line is a great example of a normal distribution where we see a center peak where the majority of data is and then we see a a lowering on the left and a lowering on the right. Beautiful, nice and symmetric and lots of continuous random variables in the world we live in. Follow this normal distribution. All right, let's talk a little bit more about this normal distribution because it's really really cool and really really awesome to work with. All right, so for a couple here's a couple of examples of things that follow normal distributions. Heights of adult humans also weights and also animals too. When it comes to heights and weights of animals or humans, they often follow this normal distribution where the majority of people are in the middle around the mean, less and less to the right, less and less to the left. Scores on large standardized exams like the ACT scores, SAT score, and AP scores also follow a normal distribution where most kids are in the middle, fewer kids on the high side, and fewer kids on the low side. Blood pressure readings, manufacturing dimensions on m machinemade parts, contents of many food items, all follow normal distribution. Now you might contents of food items. Yeah, think about a box of Cheezits. How many ounces are in that box? Well, no two boxes are going to be identical, especially when you think about three, four, five decimal places. So what happens when we think about boxes of Cheezits? Most are going to be around a particular value in the middle. There's going to be very, very, very few really, really overfilled boxes and very, very, very, very few really underfilled boxes. Or think about a bag of Doritos, right? A bag of Doritos. There's no way they all weigh exactly the same. Yes, the bag might say, you know, 17 ounces, but there no ways exactly 17 ounces. That might be what we expect, but some are a little bit more and some are a little bit less. So, lots of things in the world we live in follow this beautiful, amazing normal distribution. Now, a normal distribution can be described as continuous. It does go forever both directions. Unimodal, which means we're going to see a center peak in the middle. Bell-shaped and symmetric. Now, we shake like a bell. You know, I don't know if everybody's familiar with this, but you know, think about bells around the holiday time. They kind of look like, okay, that's a terrible example of a bell, but you get the idea, right? That's a kind of a bell shape like this, you know, and you got your your your ringer in the middle here that hangs down, things back and forth. Okay, but again, it's that that kind of bell shape. That's where it gets that name. But really, it's just symmetric and unimodal. All right. Now a normal curve can be used to model a distribution of data and a continuous random variable. These normal curves are just very very famous. Like if you think of all the different distributions out there, the normal distribution is like the king. All right. So the normal distribution or the normal curve it's also called is in is identified by two parameters. The mean and the standard deviation. So to build one of these normal distributions, all you need to know is the mean and the standard deviation. That's it. Now, the mean is the center of the distribution. And this symbol we use for the mean is mu because we're talking about the mean of a population, not just the mean of a sample. And the value we would expect the random variable to be. That's the mean, right? It's going to be right in the center. It's like what do we expect that adult male line to be? Well, 450 pounds. That's what's right smack dab in the middle. Now, when it comes to standard deviation, the smaller the standard deviation, the taller and more concentrated the normal model is. The larger the standard deviation, the shorter and less concentrated the normal distribution is around the mean. So remember, standard deviation is a measurement of how far data is from the mean. So if we see this green curve here, the mean is going to be smack dab in the middle. That's where the majority of data falls, near the mean in the middle. But if we have a small standard deviation, most data is going to be near the mean, nice and compact, less spread out. If we have a larger standard deviation, that's what we're going to see here in red, where the mean is still in the middle, but it's more spread out because when your standard deviation is bigger, it means that more and more data is further and further and further from the mean. Here's another picture of this right here. We see three normal distributions. This one has a lower center. This one has a center right here. And this one has a center right here. So, this would be the mean for the first distribution, the mean for the second, and the mean for the third. Okay. Now, what about the spreads? Well, if you look at this third model right here, it has the smaller standard deviation because the bigger chunk of data is near the mean. It doesn't spread out to the left and to the right as much. And then the middle one right here would be this one right here. And then this one in the middle is going to have a kind of the bigger standard deviation. It has more data a little bit to the right, a little bit to the left. It's more spread out. So all standard normal distributions can be described based on knowing the mean and by knowing sigma, the standard deviation. All right. So let's look at a specific picture. This was the one we talked about with our adult our adult male lines. We knew two really important things. The mean was 450 and the standard deviation was 40. Those are the only two things you need to build a standard normal model. All right. Right smack dab in the middle goes the mean. That's what we expect an adult male line to be. That's what's going to have the highest probability. The most male lines are going to be near that mean. That's exactly what a mean is. But there is a standard deviation of 40. So, we're going to go up one standard deviation taking us to 490 or we can go down one standard deviation taking us to 410. Now, we talked about this way back in unit one. The majority of data, not all, but the majority of data is within one standard deviation. So, if we look from one standard deviation below to one standard deviation above, we do see a big chunk of data. Look at that big chunk of data there. All within one standard deviation. Then we could go down two standard deviations. That would be going up or down 80. Again, one standard deviation is 40. So, going up or down two standard deviations would be going up or down 80. That takes us to 530 and 370. And then again, from two standard deviations, we see pretty much all of the data, again, not all of it, but a large majority of data is going to be in between two. And then we can go down to three standard deviations. Three standard deviations below would be going down 40, 40, and another 40 taking us to 330. four or three deviations above would be going up 40 up 40 up 40 taking us to 570. Now we typically stop at three standard deviations. Could we go to 456 above and 456 below? Absolutely. But that would be extremely unlikely. Again, most data is within one standard deviation. A ton of data is within two standard deviation and dang near all that is within three stand. Could there be some adult male lions over here above 570? Yes. [clears throat] but extremely few. Could there be some down here below? Yes, but extremely few. So that's exactly how easy it is to build a a normal distribution. Now, if we're trying to be generic, just basing it on zcores, remember zcore is how many standard deviations you are from the mean. Well, then we could just put a zero in the middle because the mean is zero standard deviations from itself. Then we go up one, two, three standard deviations, down one, down two, down three. So this normal model right here is called the standard normal distribution because it's not based on any one specific thing like this one's based on the weights of adult male lions. This is just generic. It's purely based on zcores. And remember the formula for a zcore is really really easy. We just take a particular value x subtract the mean divide by the standard deviation. So when we see this we're talking purely zcores 1 2 31gative -2g3. So let's think about heights for example. The heights of adult males. Most adult males are going to be somewhere in this model. In fact, a lot of adult males are going to be between negative 1 and positive one standard deviations from the mean height. I am pretty tall. I know you can't see me right now, but I'm about 6'4. I'm pretty tall. I'm probably somewhere around here, maybe even a little bit higher. Now, I'm not all the way over here. That's not unusual. There's lots of 6'4 people out there. But let's just say you're somebody like 77. like you're really really really tall. Maybe playing in the NBA, Victor Webanay or something like that. He would definitely be over here. He's still on the model, but he's extremely rare, very unlikely. You don't see a lot of people like that walking around. So that's the idea is that a standard normal model is purely based on zcores, which with the data, we can always turn anything into a zcore, whether talking about heights of people or weights of lions. All right, now let's get through a couple facts. This is going to be kind of a bit weird, but dear with me. If the distribution of a random variable is approximately normal, the probability that the random variable takes on values within a particular interval of the random variable is determined by the area under the curve within that interval. The total probability or area under the normal curve is one. So this is where we go all the way back to like this picture right here. This was definitely following a normal distribution. We can literally see that normal distribution. And we said, hey, what's the probability that the weight is less than 390? So we find 390 and then we shade the area below it. The that area right there shaded in blue is corresponding to the probability that an adult male line falls within that interval. Here's another one looking in between 44 to 70. And here's another one looking between 500. So we can find probabilities within a normal distribution simply by looking at the area above, below, or even in between. All right. So, this is where things get really, really awesome because we know that in a normal distribution, now again, you have to make sure that we know this is a normal distribution. The empirical rule I'm about to go over only applies if it's a normal distribution, approximately 68% of all observations are within one standard deviation of the mean. So, I've been saying that the majority of data is within one standard deviation, and it's well over the majority. It's 68%. 95% of observations fall within two standard deviations and 99.7% of observations are within three standard deviations of the mean. So the empirical rule is this idea of what's called the 68 95 99.7 rule. It tells us this when you follow a normal distribution and only when you follow a normal distribution we know that 68% of data falls within one standard deviation 95% falls within two standard deviation and 99.7% fall within three standard deviations. So that's exactly why we don't go above three or below negative three because it's so unlikely. Now it's not impossible because 99.7% is not 100% but it's pretty darn close. So again, it does give us that wiggle room that you know, Victor Rambayata, he is going to be up here somewhere with a very large Zcore because he is well above the mean. So he's definitely going to be outside of three because he's pretty special. Now, here's another view of this exact same thing, but it's just broken down. If we know that 68% of data is within one, we know there's 34% from the mean to one below, 34% from the mean to one above, all we're doing is taking that 68% and splitting it in half. Then we know there's 95% of data within two standard deviations. So from here to here is 95% of data. Now we already have 68% taken right here. So that means that the remaining 27% would get split up 13.5% between negative 1 and -2 13.5% between positive 1 and positive2. So in grand total there's the 95% right there. Now, honestly, don't worry about memorizing these numbers. It is a nice kind of simple way to do it if you can, but listen, we're going to learn how technology and our Desmos and calculus can do all this for us. And then 99.7% fall within three standard deviations. Now that means all the way from here all the way to here is 99.7%. Which means a whopping.3% of data again split up 0.15% here.15% here. So if 99.7% of data is within three standard deviations, 3% is outside of that but because of symmetry it gets split up 0.15% at the very very bottom and 0.15% for the very very top showing that Victor Bambayana is extremely extremely tall and that very very top echelon. All right. Now that's called the empirical world. It just helps us to remember how that data is broken down. But don't spend too much time trying to memorize that because you could use Desmos to do all the work for you. So if we are exactly at one, two, three standations above or below, we can use the empirical rule to calculate some probabilities. Even though most kids are probably going to do this, I do want to kind of go over it with you real quick. So if we said, what's the probability that an adult male line is from 410 to 490? Well, 410 is exactly one standard deviation below. 490 is exactly one standard deviation above. And again, how do I know that? Well, remember the mean was 450 and the standard deviation was 40. So if I go down 40, that takes me to 410. If I go up 40, that takes me to 490. So that's again within one standard deviation above to below. Well, again, that's going to be that middle 68% that we already know is within one standard deviation. Then if we said, what about a less than 370? Okay, well 370 is exactly two standard deviations below the mean. So that would be all of this below. And if we add all that up, we get 2.5%. So that'd be the 2.35% right here and the 0.15% here. So roughly 2.5% of all male lions are less than 370. Now again, you don't have to memorize all these. Some kids will be like, "Oh, do I have to memorize all these numbers?" Honestly, no. But you should understand the math to create that model that I just did right here. But no, you'll see very shortly. We don't have to memorize it because what if we're asked about a value that's not exactly one, two, three standard deviations above or below the mean? I mean, it's nice if we are, but certainly not all lines are going to be exactly at those values. So, let's talk about how to figure out a question like this. What is the probability that a random adult male line weighs over 462 lbs? Well, one thing we could do is go all the way back to this model right here that we built and we could find 462 lbs. Maybe somewhere around here and then we could look at all of this area above it. Well, how do we find that area? Well, honestly, calculus. Now, don't get too panicked here, but basically would need calculus, a very extreme, crazy looking function to build that model. Then, we'd have to use integrals to find the area underneath it. But again, do not worry about any of that. You will never have to worry about any of this on the AP exam because we have our calculators to do all of the work for us. Whether you use a numeric, a T84 or Desmos, all of them have a normal distribution model built into them that allows you to calculate normal distribution probabilities well with very, very, very little work. It's really, really simple to do. It's actually kind of fun. So, let's go back to this question. What is the probability that a random adult male line weighs over 462 pounds? So, the first thing we got to do is make sure that we're using an appropriate model. The model we want to use, and this is just how we notate it, is a normal distribution with a mean of 450 and a standard deviation of 40. This is just a way to notate it. N for normal. The first value there is the mean and then the second value is our is our standard deviation 40. Now, you could draw the picture of that normal distribution, but you don't even have to do that at all. Now the first thing we do have to do is calculate the zscore for this particular adult male line. What we have to do is figure out where this line fits into the model. So all we have to do is use our zcore formula. 462 minus 450 / 40 and we get.3. That means that this adult male lion weighing 462 lbs is only.3 standard deviations above the mean. It's only a little bit above the mean. All right. Now what we want to do is calculate the probability. Well, basically what we want to do is [snorts] notate this properly. This is where it's really important because your calculator is going to do a lot of the work, but you have to know how to notate it. So the first thing we want to do is write down the question in context. What is the probability that the weight of an adult male lion is greater than 362 pounds? So notice what I did there. P for probability and then inside the parenthesis is what we're looking for just notated. W is the random variable for the weight of the adult male lion. I'm looking for to be greater than 362 pounds. But on a standard normal model using zcores, that would be the exact same thing as the probability of a zcore being greater than.3. These two statements are equivalent. One is using zcores and one is using the actual weights of lions. But at the end of the day, we have shown that excuse me that should say 462. Sorry for that typo right there. That should be a 462, not a 362. So 462 is equivalent to a zcore of.3. If a lion weighs 462 pounds, that line is.3 standard deviations above the mean. Okay, now comes the fun part. How do we find that area? Again, earlier I shaded it for you, but we actually want to find it. Right here was that area right there above 462 lbs. Okay, now again this should all make sense, right? Think about why this makes sense. 450 is the mean, which has a zcore of zero. 490 is one standard deviation above. So we're about right here about.3 standard deviations above is where 462 would fall. Now, how do we find that area? Okay, strap on because this is where it's going to get awesome. You might be like, boy, you're explaining an awful lot here and if you're just going to use the calculator to get the answer. Yes, but I'm a teacher. I'm supposed to be explaining it to you. So, here's what you're going to do. You're going to go ahead and you're going to grab your Desmos. Now, you can do this on numerous. You can do this on TD4, but Desmos is the one that's free for everybody to use on the AP exam. Click on the plus sign. Go to inference. Then, at the very top is probability distributions. Now, there is a drop-own box here, but it should default to normal distribution. Now, I'm going to show you two ways to do this. I'm going to set the mean at zero and the standard deviation at one. If you do that, what you're building is a standard normal distribution entirely based on zcores. Hit create distribution and there it is. It even shows you a nice little picture of it. Now on the left hand side here, there's a drop down arrow for cumulative probability. This allows us to look inside of two values, outside of two values, to the left of a value, or to the right of a value. Well, what we want to do for this particular question is look to the right of 0.3. So, I'm going to type in 0.3 right there. And I typed in too many decimals. There it is. 0.3. And we get our answer. Now, it's pretty cool. It even shades it in kind of just like I drew it. Well, it actually draws it for you. It shades the area above a zcore of.3. And the answer is 382. So, if we want to figure out our answer, there it is. The probability that a lion is greater than 462 pounds. So sorry for that typo. Is a zcore greater than 0.3, which is 382. Now I like using this formula on the calculator. And I like I'm going to do that again. I show you one more time. Hit the plus sign. Inference probability distribution should default to normal. I like using zcores because to me zcores are universal. So when you type in a zero and a one, it does use a normal distribution that is standard, meaning it's going to use zcores, but you could also use the values from the problem. So I could type in 450. That was the mean for lions. And I could type in a standard deviation of 40. That was the standard deviation. And then it's actually going to create a model based on the actual weights of lions. So now when I go to cumulative probability, I'm going to go to the right and I'm going to type in 462. And there it is. Notice it's the exact same answer whether we use greater than 462 or we use the zcore that 462 is equivalent to of.3 we get that same answer of 382. So pretty cool pretty simple again it could go in between values outside of values left of a value or right of a value. Now one more thing you might notice is it says greater than or equal to. Does it matter? No. Notice I did not write greater than or equal to and my question just said over. It didn't even say greater than equal to. Well, remember the normal distribution equal to doesn't matter because the one thing the normal distribution cannot do is calculate the probability that's equal to any one particular value. So whether you do greater than 462 or greater than or equal to 462, it's technically going to give me the exact same answer. All right, now let's look at some other questions. Here's the next one. What is the probability the d adult adult male line weighs less than 335? Okay, so we're going to use that standard normal model one more time with 450 and 40. And now we're gonna find the zcore. Wh we're gonna find the zcore for 335. The zcore is negative -2.875. So this is a really really lightweight lion. Okay. It's not it's very low. -2.875 is extremely low. It's it's almost three below which is very unlikely. So what we want to do right now is calculate the probability that the lion is less than 335 lbs which is a zcore less than -2.875. Now I'm going to go to my calculator here on Desmos. Now I already have it set up for the adult male lions with a mean of 450 and a standard deviation of 40. So I don't need zcores. I'm just going to go to left this time and I'm going to type in 335. 335. There it is. And notice I get a very very low probability. In fact, you can actually barely see the shaded region down here that is below 335. That's because this is a really really adult lion. The probability that we are less than that is 0.002. Now, if you want to see more decimals, click on the little dropown box menu here and it will show you more decimals. It typically rounds it to three. But if you want more decimals, it' be 0.00202. So again, very, very unlikely that an adult male lion is less than 335 pounds. But how easy is it to do that math when you have Desmos? All right, let's look at another example. What is the probability that adult male lion weighs between 394 and 534? Well, once again, we need a normal distribution. Now, I want to say one more thing really important. If we were never told that the weights of adult male lines falls a normal distribution, we cannot do any of this. Like literally, we cannot do any of these problems. We can only do these problems because it does follow a normal distribution, which is the most famous distribution. All right. Now the first thing we're going to do to show our work is get the zcores for 394 and 534 and then we're going to look in between them. So again asking about the probability that a line is between 394 and 534 is the same thing as a zcore being between negative 1.4 and 2.1. So if you're using Desmos and you are using a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, then you have to be using zcores. But if you have it set to have a mean of 450 and a standard deviation of 40, then you could use the values from the actual problem. All I have to do is go to Desmos. This time I'm going to select inside and I'm going to go from 394 to 534 and it shades the region and it gives me the answer 901. And don't forget to click on that little dropown box to get a little bit more information there. 0.91. Easy, easy, easy. So easy to get these answers. It makes these questions very fast. And maybe like, why are you taking so long to explain it? Well, because I kind of should explain it. All right. Now, let's look at a slightly harder problem. What weight would mark the 90th percentile of all adult male lines? Okay, so remember what a percentile is. It's a weight. It's a particular value that has 90% below it. So, we're trying to figure out what weight has 90% below it. Now, remember, we could think about it in two ways. If there's 90% below it, well, there's also 10% above it. So, we're trying to figure out what is the missing weight. Like, we're actually working backwards. I call these backward problems because we know that there's 90% above or 10% below. Oh, excuse me, I said that backwards. 90% below, 10% above. What we don't know is the weight that marks those values. So in the previous questions, we were given the weight of the lion and we were asked to find the area above, the area below or the area in between. But now we're given these areas and we have to find the actual weights. Well, first what we have to do is determine the zcore that has 90% below it and 10% above it. Then we could use that zcore to solve for the weight of a line. Now whether you're using numeric TID4 or normal distribution on your Desmos, all of them have the ability to do what we call an inverse normal distribution where we flip this. Now there's other videos I have that show how to do this on numerics and T84, but in this video I am going to show how to do it using a Desmos because that's what everybody has access to. All right, so basically a Zcore of 1.282 has 90% below it, 10% above it. Now, you might be wondering, how did you know that? Desmos, check this out. I'm still I'm actually gonna close this. I'm going to go back to the plus sign inference. I'm going to go ahead and build a normal distribution with a mean of zero, assiation of one. This means I'm working with zcores. It's a standard normal distribution working with zcores. Okay. Now, instead of it defaults to area, right? Well, that means the answer is the area. So, again, you could do inner, outer, left or right. And again, the area is going to be the answer. But check this out. If I click on bounds, what this allows me to do is allows me to click into the answer and I'll get the value. All right. So, for example, we want to find the zcore that is 90% below it. So, I'm going to go to left. And now, because I have bounds selected, I could type on the right hand side here 0.9. So, this is going to find me the zcore that is 90% below it. Notice the answer is 1.282. 282 I could equivalently click on right and type in 0.1 because if you have 90% below you have 10% above which either way is still a zcore of 1.282. So now that I know the zcore that has 90% below it what I could do now is use my zcore formula. The zcore formula is the zcore 1.282 282 equals the value that I'm looking for minus 450 / 40. Again, my mean and standard deviation. Now, all I have to do is a little bit of math to solve. First thing I'm going to do is multiply the 40 over and then I'm going to add the 450. Again, some basic algebra, nothing too difficult here to solve for x and I get 501.262 pounds. That means that if you are a adult male lion that weighs at 5001.262 pounds, you are at the 90th percentile. 90% of lions weigh less than that. 10% weigh more than that. Now, I like doing math. So, I wanted to show you how to do the math. But you know what most of you are going to do? You're going to do this. You're not going to use a storm use a standard normal distribution. You're going to create a model based on the problem. So the mean is 450 and the standard deviation is 40. So now when you do it this way when you go under cumulative probability click on bounds and again we're going to do left. Now when I type in 0.9 it's just going to give me the answer 501.262. Again that's the weight of a line that is 90% below it. And again, if I click on right and change that to 0.1, that's going to also give me the exact same value that has the 10% above it. Now, that's not showing any work. Again, all I had to do is type in the mean and the standard deviation, and all of the work is done for me. All I have to know is how to use Desmos. But listen, I don't know what your teachers can require. I require my students to show their work. So, I make them find the zcore, which means they have to use a standard normal distribution. Then I make them actually solve this equation to solve for X. I'm big on showing work even though I allow them to use Desmos to check their work and they love that. All right, let's look at another problem. What weight marks the middle 60%. Okay. Well, the first thing I got to do is figure out what Zcore marks that middle 60%. Now, there's a couple different ways we could think about this. We could think about the middle 60% in the middle. But if you're 60% in the middle, well, that also means you have 20% below, and 20% above. Because if there's 60 in the middle, that means there's 40% left out. 60 in the middle, 20 at the bottom, 20 at the top. There's your total of 100%. All right. So, the first thing we got to do is figure out those zcores. And I'm going to tell you right now, those zcores are negative.842 and positive. 0842. But I want to show you how the heck I got those. Now, if we're in Desmos already and we already have the mean and standard deviation set at 450 and40, all I got to do is go to enter and over here under again, make sure you have bounds selected, type in 0.6, and there's my answers. Let's just be honest. So, 60% of lions are between 416.3, click on that little drop down if you want to see more decimals, and 483.7. Click on that little drop down if you want to see more decimals. That's it. That's my answer. Those are the two weights. Now, if you're like me or if you have a teacher like me who wants work shown, well, now we got to go to inference probability distribution and we want to leave it at 0 and one. Setting up a standard normal distribution. Now, when we go down here again, click on bounds and type in 0.6. And now it's going to give me the zcore. So, this is not weights of lines. These are zscores negative.842 and positive.842. So those are the zcores that represent that middle 60%. And then if I'm requiring my students to show some work, I'm going to ask them to actually do that solving. Multiply the 40 over, add the 450 over, and you get those two rates, the 416, the 483. Now again, if you were already set up with the mean of 450 and a standard deviation of 40, you don't even have to do any of that work. It'll simply give you those answers really, really quickly for you. All right, let's do another one right here. What weight marks the most extreme 5% of adult male lions? The most extreme. This is the top 5% of all lines. So now we're looking at that top 5%. But hold on a minute. It didn't say top. It didn't say bottom. It just said the most extreme. So this could be either the top 2 and a half% or the bottom two and a half%. If you want to think about the word extreme, the word extreme could be either extremely big or extremely small. So if I'm trying to figure out the marks for the most extreme 5% of lions, I'm actually talking about the top two and a half or the bottom two and a half because in total that's that extreme 5%. So once again, I need to figure out those zcores. So now I'm going to go to outside and I'm going to type in the outside 0.025. This is the outside 2 and a half%. So that's the zcore of negative 2.241 or positive 2.41. 41. Those two zcores have two and a half percent outside them. Or I could do individual. Like I could just do the bottom two and a half percent. Um, and I get Oh, wait a minute. Did I do that wrong? The bottom 0.025 and I get Oh, I did that wrong. I apologize. Okay, so the bottom two and a half% would be a zcore of -1.96. When I was doing inner, I was doing it wrong. I apologize. And then on the right side, we could do the upper and it's also positive 1.96. If I wanted to do the outer, I would need what I need to do here is type in 0.05. And that's gonna actually do both of that. It's going to do the outside 5%. But it's smart. It knows to split that outside 5% up. Two and a half at the top, two and a half at the bottom. And there's the positive and negative 1.96. So that's where we get those zcores that mark those extreme lines. Now, if we're in standard normal model mode, now we're working with zcores. We have to do some solving. All we got to do is solve by multiplying the 40 and adding the 450 to actually solve for X, those weights of lines. So if you are above 528.4, you are in that top extreme highest weights of lines. If you're below 371, you're in that bottom lowest weight. All right, but again, let me just show you because I want to make sure I love you and I want to show you how to do this nice and easy. I know everyone's looking for how to do it easy. If you have it set up with a mean of 450 and a standard deviation of 40 when you click create distribution for example let's do uh outs outer and let's do the outer let's click on bounds here do the outer 0.05 05. And again, there's those two numbers, the 371, the 528, the same two numbers that I got when I did the work by hand. Pretty nice and simple. All right, so let's recap what we learned about in this video. First, we talked about continuous random variables, and we gave you a couple of examples and show how we could look at them and how every probability or every interval, excuse me, of a continuous random variable has a probability associated with it. Then we talked about the most famous normal distribution that so many continuous random variables follow is a normal distribution. Then we started to talk about how to find areas or probabilities within a normal distribution using Desmos. Now, if you're following along with my guided notes, you'll see there's a couple more practice problems left and I have a separate video over those. This video is getting kind of long and I know that I did a ton of examples, but if you want more examples, check out the second video for this. It has more examples in it. And there's also a topic 3 point or excuse me topic 2.11 part two because this is just the tippity top of the iceberg when it comes to normal distribution problems. There are actually even more extreme or they say more extreme. There's more um harder maybe is a good more advanced maybe advanced is a better word. There's more advanced problems that could be calculated or and worked on using the normal distribution. So, I have a whole another part two video that covers those. But, if you're looking for the additional problems that are in the guided notes, go on over to the next video for this. You'll see some examples of those dealing with a 3D printer. But then, don't worry because you also got topic 2.11 part two that goes over even more advanced problems working with the standard normal distribution. All right, that's it. I know it's a lot, but this is a really important topic that you cannot gloss over because the normal distribution is going to be used throughout the entire rest of the course.
Hey statsars, welcome to AP statistics. In this video, we'll be covering topic 2.11 part two over the normal distribution. If you haven't already, be sure to download the guided notes that accompany this lesson from the ultimate review packet for AP statistics. There's a link in the description below. The guided notes will help you follow along and build a complete set of notes for the course. In this video, we will cover some tougher problems with the normal distribution and how to use the inverse normal distribution to help. As always, we'll begin by learning the key concepts and skills for this topic and then we'll finish with AP style practice problems to help you apply what we've learned. Let's get started and always remember, one topic at a time, one step closer to a five. All right, so hopefully by now you already watched the previous video over the normal distribution part one cuz now we're going to tackle some more difficult problems involving the normal distribution. All right, more difficult problems have you solve for the mean and or standard deviation. In these problems, you will be given some information about the scenario and need to use that information and the Z score formula to solve for what's missing. So, what we looked at in the previous video over part one was we knew the mean, we knew the standard deviation, we answered a bunch of really cool easy problems with it, especially with using Desmos, makes them super simple. But now, we have to actually solve for the mean and standard deviation. And let's talk about some examples right now. So, quiz scores are approximately normally distributed with a standard deviation of six. We do not know the mean. It is known that 84% of students score below 78. So, here's what we do know. We do know the standard deviation and that is six. Okay, that's awesome. But the other piece of information is this. We know that 84% of students score below a 78. Okay, so what we need to do is figure out a couple things. First, we are going to use our Z score formula. That is 100% true. Now, we already know the standard deviation right here. That's going to be a six. That's awesome. Now, what we have to do is use the given information. We do not know what mu is. That's what we're going to solve for. But we do know one particular value, 78, has 84% below it. So, we can use the standard normal distribution to figure out what Z score has 84% below it. Remember, X is the actual value from the problem, in this case 78, but the Z score is the value that represents that 78. Now, the piece of information we know is that 84% of data is below that particular value. So, the first thing I'm going to do is I'm going to go ahead to Desmos and hit this plus sign, click on inference, click on normal distribution. It should default at the top of the list to normal distribution. I'm going to use a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. I can't use the mean and standard deviation from my problem cuz guess what? I don't know what the mean is. All right. Now, when I'm here, I'm going to go to cumulative probability and I'm going to click bounds. Now, we were told that 84% of students are below a 78. So, below is to the left. And over here, since we're on bounds, we're going to type in 0.84 for the 84%. What this does, this gives us the Z score, the exact Z score to three decimal places, that has 84% below it. And we know that in our model, the value that has 84% below it is 78. Now, the Z score is 0.994. So, here's what we're going to do. We're going to substitute everything we know in. We know the value is 78, we know the standard deviation is six, and we know the Z score that corre- corresponds to 78 is 0.994. Now, again, how do we know that? Because the connector is the 84% that's below 78. We know using the standard normal model that we can find the Z score that has 84% below it, and that Z score is 0.994, and that is the Z score that represents 78 in our model. Got it? Hopefully that makes sense. Now, the rest of the question is all algebra. The first thing we're going to do to solve for mu is multiply the six to the left-hand side. Then we're going to get rid of that positive 78 by subtracting 78. Then we're going to actually do the math and then we are going to have to divide or multiply by a negative to get rid of the negative on the mu. So, once we do the math, we get -72.036, but that equals negative mu, so we just got to get rid of those negative signs. So, the mean quiz score is 72.036. How simple, how easy is that? All we had to do first was get that Z score based on what was given. All right, here's another one. The weights of packages shipped by company are normally distributed with a mean and standard deviation and with a standard deviation, excuse me, of 1.5 lb. We do not know the mean. But we were told that 2.5% of packages are more than 18.5 lb. So, 2.5% of packages are above 18.5 lb. All right, so once again, we're going to start off with our formula. Now, good news is we already know what that standard deviation is, so we can put a 1.5 there. We do know X. X is a particular value. The particular value that we're told in our problem is 18.5. What we need to do is figure out the Z score that corresponds to 18.5. Now, how do we find that Z score? Well, we know that 2.5% of packages are above 18.5. So, we got to do is use Desmos to figure out what Z score has 2.5% above it. So, once again, this time I'm going to go to the right cuz to the right is above and since I'm selecting bounds, I can now type in 0.025. And too many zeros there. 0.025, there we go. So, 1.96 is the Z score that has 2.5% above it. All right. So, now we just got to plug everything in. So, there's my Z score of 1.96. 18.5 is the value that has that Z score with 2.5% below it. And then we do not know what mu is. That's the mean, but we do know the standard deviation is 1.5. Step one, multiply the 1.5 over. Then we got to get rid of that positive 18.5 by subtracting 18.5. Then we're just going to grab a calculator or you can do it in Desmos to do that math. We do get a negative 15.56, but that's because there's a negative on the mu as well that we got to get rid of. So, 15.56 lb is the mean weight of packages shipped by this company based on what was given to us. Pretty cool. Now, sometimes even be a follow-up question. So, part B says, "What percent of packages weigh less than 15 lb?" Well, we could not answer this question first because to find the percent below 15 lb, we would need a Z score, which means we need the mean and standard deviation. So, we did have to find the mean first. But now we could go ahead and answer this question. What percent of packages weigh less than 15 lb? So, the first thing I'm going to do is get the Z score for 15 lb by subtracting the mean that we just found and dividing by the standard deviation of 1.5. So, then I'm going to figure out the probability that a Z score is below -0.373, and that's 0.355. And again, where did I get that answer from? From my Desmos, of course. So, what I'm going to do here now I'm going to click on area because this time we're looking for the area, and we want to look below, and we want to do a Z score of -0.3 73. And that's how I got that answer of 0.355 or 35.5%. Again, because this time I don't know the bounds. I'm looking for the area. I know the value that's stopping. So, hopefully that makes sense. All right. So, again, what I want to show you just real quickly here is that these two statements are equivalent. One is using the actual problem values, the weight being less than 15 lb, but because I just showed that a weight of 15 lb has a Z-score of -0.373, this is another way of looking at it using Z-scores. And since on Desmos, I'm using a standard normal distribution with a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1, I do have to use the Z-score, but I get the same answer, nice and simple. All right, let's look at another problem. The time to complete a test is normally distributed with a mean of 70 minutes. About 3% of students finish the test in under 58 minutes. Now, this time I know the mean, what I don't know is the standard deviation. All right, but I was given a really important piece of information. 3% of students finish the test under 58 minutes. So, what I'm going to do is I'm going to start off with my Z-score formula. I already know the mean is 70. I do not know what sigma is. That's what we're trying to solve for, the standard deviation. But X is a particular value, in this case that particular value is 58. What I need to figure out is what Z-score represents 58 that has 3% under it. So, once again, I'm going to go to Desmos, and I'm going to click on bounds because I know the area to the left below is .0 3. 3%. So, a Z-score of -1.881 has 3% below it. So, now I'm going to plug everything in. 58 is the value that I know has a Z-score of -1.881. Now, again, I want to make sure I'm clear on this. This and these two numbers are very different. One is the actual time in minutes, the other one is the Z-score that represents that time in minutes, all with 3% below it. 70 is the mean that we were given in the problem. Now, we just got to do a little bit of basic algebra to solve for the standard deviation. The first thing I'm going to do is I'm actually going to do two things at once. I'm going to multiply the sigma to the left side, opposite divide is multiply, and 58 minus 70 is -14. Actually, take that back. It wouldn't be a video by me if it didn't have a slight typo. -12. -12 is 58 minus 70. Now, we got to do to solve for sigma is just some really simple math. We're going to take the -12 and divide by the -1.881. Pretty simple. So, we do that and we get a value of 6.3795 or about 6.380. 6.380 is the standard deviation for the amount of time to complete this test. Now, I wouldn't be a good teacher if I didn't emphasize that all of this is only possible because it said it was normally distributed. If it didn't say that this particular random variable how much time it takes to complete a test was normally distributed, I could not do any of this work. All right, hopefully that makes a lot of sense and that was a really easy problem. All right, now let's look at another one. The lifetime of a car tire is normally distributed. How many miles a car tire lasts follows a normal distribution. Now, we do know the mean is 45,000 and we know that 16% of tires last longer than 50,000. That means that 16% are over or to the right of 50,000. What we don't know is the standard deviation. So, once again, I'm going to start with that Z score formula cuz that's what the standard deviation it is that I'm going to solve for right here. Now, I already know the mean is 45,000, so I can replace that mu with that. The particular value that I was given in the problem is 50,000, but what I got to do real quick is figure out the Z score that represents 50,000 with 16% longer or greater than it. So, I'm going to go to my standard normal model. I'm going to select a right and since I have bounds selected, I can type in 0.16. So, this is going to give me that top 16% as a Z score of 0.994. All right, there everything is subbed in. 50,000 is the value, 45,000 is the mean, 0.994 is the Z score that represents 50,000 with 16% above it. Now, all I got to do is the simple math to solve for sigma. All right, this time I did the math correct. Multiply the sigma over. 50,000 minus 45,000 is 5,000. And then we just got to divide over the 0.994. Use your calculator, we get 5,030.181. So, the standard deviation of how long these tires last is 5,030 miles. Well, 5,000 A little bit over 5,030 miles. You get the idea. Now, sometimes you're asked a follow-up question because now that we know the mean and the standard deviation, we can actually answer more questions. So, one question might be what proportion of tires last between 40,000 and 55,000? Well, this is what we're trying to figure out. The proportion or probability of tires in between 40,000 and 55,000. Whether we ask for proportion or probability, it's all the same process, it's all the same answer. All right, the first thing we got to do is get the two Z scores. The Z score for 40,000 and the Z score for 55,000. That's pretty easy. There's the work for that. Then what we got to do is use a standard normal distribution and look in between those two Z scores. So, again, all you got to do is go and grab Desmos to look in between those two Z scores. All right, so we're just going to go ahead here and click inner and we're going to go in between Well, we got to click on area first cuz this time we're looking for the area. This allows me to go inside here and type in zero uh negative 0.994. And that's the Z score for 40,000 and the Z score for 50,000 was 1.9 88. And boom, there is my answer, 0.816. So, that's how I got that answer. Oh, wait a minute. I got 0.516. Oh, and of course I did that on purpose just to show you that I'm human, too, and make some mistakes. It is 0.816. Desmos does confirm that between those two Z scores is 0.816. I must have let a finger slip there when I was typing that. Sorry about that. All right, let's do another example cuz the more practice we do, the better. But, this time we're really going to step it up. These are probably the hardest normal distribution questions out there. Might not even see one on this year's AP exam, but you never know. All right, SAT scores are approximately normally distributed for a particular school, a particular area, a particular region, who knows? A score of 600 corresponds to the 50th percentile, and a score of 700 corresponds to the 84th percentile. All right. Well, let's find the mean and the standard deviation. So, this problem, we don't know the mean and we don't know the standard deviation. But, here's what we do know, which is going to allow us to solve this problem. Now, the good news is that this problem is really not that bad, but the bad news is that it does involve a lot of algebra. All right, we know that a score of 600 is at the 50th percentile. That means 50% of scores are below a 600. Now, wait a minute. That's the median. But, if we're nice and symmetric with the normal distribution is, well, that's actually the mean. Right? Because we know that the mean has 50% above it and 50% below it. So, we already know the mean is 600, which means that that's actually pretty low SAT score. So, for wherever this data is being taken from, they're not doing too good on the SAT. But, the other piece of information is that 84th percentile is a score of 700. That means 84% of data is below a 700. Okay, so what we have to do here is a little bit of work. The first thing we got to do is calculate the two Z scores for those two pieces of information. So, here is our Z score formula. The first is 600 and we're going to subtract the mean. I don't know it. We're going to subtract the standard deviation. I don't know it. The second is 700, subtract the mean, which I don't know, and divide by the standard deviation, which I don't know. But we do know those Z scores. How? Well, if you are at the 50th percentile, that means 50% of data is below that. So again, if I go and grab Desmos here, and we click on bounds, we look at to the left, and I want Z 50%, 0.50 to the left, and notice how that corresponds to a Z score of zero. And then we also know that 700 had 84% below it, so we're going to do 0.84 below, that's to the left, and we get a Z score of 0.994. So again, a 600 has a Z score of zero because there's 50% below it, that's the Z score of zero. And then 700 has a Z score of 0.994, that has 84% below it. Now comes the algebra. Let's solve the one on the left first cuz it's the easier one. First thing I'm going to do is multiply the sigma over, then I'm going to go ahead and subtract 600. But this is really easy math. Zero times anything is zero, so that wipes it out. So we have -600 = - mu, but we can get rid of those negatives, and now we know the mean is 600. But we actually should have known that because if you're at the 50th percentile, that means you are the median and the mean because we're normally distributed, that means 600 is the mean. So I kind of already knew that, but I wanted to show you the work. Now what we have to do is take that mean and plug it over here and solve for the standard deviation in the other equation. This is a good old algebra one problem where you have two equations with two unknowns, and you have to do some solving to get it. All right, so plugging 600 into the other equation, now I'm going to do the math there. I'm going to multiply the sigma to the left-hand side. 700 - 600 on top is the 100, then I'm going to divide by the 0.994 to solve, and 100 / 0.994 is 100.604. So now I know that for this particular region, wherever this data is collected from, the mean SAT score 600, again, not doing very good, and the standard deviation is 100.604. So, that's how I was able to do it. It's a pretty good problem. A lot of thinking goes into that one. And then, there's always follow-up questions we can answer. All right, now that we know the mean and standard deviation, what proportion of students score above 750? Well, we're looking for the proportion of students that score a greater than 750, or we're looking for the probability that a random student scores above 750. So, the first thing we're going to do is get the Z score for 750, which is 1.491. That means we're simultaneously asking for the probability that a Z score is greater than 1.491 on the standard normal distribution. And I got about 6.8%. Now, one more time, where did I get that from? Well, we're going to select area, cuz now we're looking for the area to the right greater than 750, and we're going to go and type in that Z score of 1.491, and that is how I got that 6.8%. And again, you can always click on that little arrow right there to get more decimals if you want. But, hopefully that makes a lot of sense of how easy it is to do that problem. All right, let's step it up and do an even harder one now. Commute times are normally distributed. This is how long it takes people in a particular region to drive to and from work. About 6% of times are less than 20 minutes. 95% of commuters take less than 42 minutes. Okay, so we know that 6% of times are below 20 minutes, and 95% of times are below 42 minutes. We have to use those two pieces of information to create two equations where we could solve for the mean and the standard deviation. Here we go. All right, the first equation, again, notice I'm only using one equation. The one and only one equation I'm using is the Z score. All right, so 20 was the first value. We don't know the mean. We don't know the standard deviation, but we can calculate the Z score that has 6% below it because we know 6% of times are below 20. So using the standard normal distribution, I could get that Z score. Let me show you real quick how easy that is. All we're going to do is click on bounds and do left. And this is going to be the 6% 0.06 that's below it. And there's how I got the Z score of -1.555. Now for the second equation, we're going to use 42 minus the mu divided by the standard deviation. But this time we know that 95% of data is below 42. So to get that Z score, we're going to go back here, but this time we're going to type in the area below is 0 uh excuse me 0.94. And that's how I got that Z score. Oh, I typed it in wrong. It was 0.95. Oh, now I'm typing everything in wrong here. Sorry about this. 0.95. There we go. 95% of data has that is to the left or below has a Z score of 1.645. So that's how I got that Z score of 1.645. So notice the common trend in every problem we've been doing in video, we've been using the normal distribution kind of backwards to actually figure out the Z scores that represent the given percentages that were in the problem. All right, now this problem is where the algebra is going to get a little bit tricky, so hang with me. Now the first thing we're going to do is start with the left equation, and I'm going to solve for mu. So the first thing I had to do is multiply the sigma to the left-hand side. Then we're going to subtract the 20, and then I'm going to divide everything by a negative to get rid of that negative right there because we want to solve for mu. Now don't forget we don't know what sigma is. So when you multiply that sigma over, it's -1.555 sigma minus 20. And then we divide everything by a negative. This turns into a positive 1.555 sigma plus 20 equals mu. Okay, now we got to do is the exact same thing for the other equation. We're going to solve it for mu as well. Now listen, there are other ways to solve this problem. I just think that this is personally the easiest way that I like to show my students. So solving this one for mu, same process. Multiply the sigma over getting 1.645 sigma, subtract the 42 over, and then we do have to get rid of the negative on this mu right here by dividing everything by a negative, which is going to turn this into a negative 1.645 sigma plus 42 equals mu. Now here is the most important part. These two mu's, this mu right here and this mu right here are the exact same. So we know that mu from the left equation equals mu from the right equation. So we could basically take those two equations and set them equal to each other. So we're going to take the 1.55 sigma plus 20 and set it equal to the negative 1.645 sigma plus 42. Now we got to do some algebra. Okay, I'm going to add the 1.645 sigma to the left. Both of these have a sigma, so those are common terms. I can add those together to get 3.2 sigma. Then I'm going to subtract the 20 over to this side, and 42 minus 20 is 22. Hopefully that algebra makes sense. Then I'm going to divide both sides by 3.2 to solve for sigma. So 22 divided by 3.2 gives me a sigma is 6.875. Ah, not done yet because now I have to find mu. I found the standard deviation, now I have to find the mean. Well, I can actually take that sigma of 6.875 and I can plug it in here, or I can plug it in here. Both of them should get the exact same answer. So here it is, I plugged it over here. Right here I plugged it in for sigma, 6.875, multiplied by 1.555 plus 20, and I get 30.691. So, I'm finally all done. I have my mean, 30.691 minutes is the average time, commute time, for people to go to work, and some people take more time, some people take less time, so there is a standard deviation of 6.875. But, 95% of this problem is algebra. This is the statistics part. Setting up these two equations is the only part that's, well, should be new to you. Basically, I had to use my Z score formula, and then the two values I was given was 20 and 42, but I had to use these percentages to figure out the Z scores that correspond to those. 6% is less than 20, that was a Z score of -1.55, 95% is less than 42, that's a Z score of 1.645. After that, it's all algebra. And oh, yeah, there might have even been a follow-up question. Now that we know the mean and standard deviation, then we could say, "Hey, what percentage of commuters are between 25 and 40 minutes?" So, we're trying to find the probability, or the percentage, or the proportion of times that are between 25 and 40 minutes. So, the first thing I do is get the two Z scores for 25 and 40. Then, we're going to ask the question, "Okay, in context, we're trying to find the probability that we're between 25 and 40 minutes, but using the corresponding Z scores, we're going to be looking at the proportion or probability or percentage of data between a Z score of -0.828 and a Z score of 1.354, and using my standard normal distribution on my Desmos calculator, I get an answer of 0.708." And of course, I want to show you that real quick, so once again, we're going to click on area, cuz we're trying to find the area, and we want to find the area in between. So, now we're just going to type in those two Z scores. The first Z score is -0.828, and then the upper Z score was 1.354 and there's the 70.8 or 0.708 70.8% of data that is in between those two values which is 25 and 40 minutes. Woo, that was a lot. Now listen, these problems can definitely be a little bit more challenging which is why I went to separate video going over them but every one of these problems starts with us knowing that we're using a normal distribution and if you have a normal distribution life is easy because you have that feature of Desmos to help you figure out Z scores and areas and probabilities above, probabilities below and in between. It really makes life easy. But the problems that we cover in this video are some of the more challenging ones so go back and watch any of them again if you need to but these questions can all definitely come up on an exam in class and on the AP test as well.

2.12
Hey statsars, welcome to AP statistics. In this video we'll be covering topic 2.12 over sampling distributions and the central limit theorem. If you haven't already, be sure to download the guided notes that accompany this lesson from the ultimate review packet for AP statistics. There's a link in the description below. The guided notes will help you follow along and build a complete set of notes for the course. In this video we will take our time learning exactly what a sampling distribution is and how they are vital to pretty much everything that has yet to come in AP statistics. As always, we'll begin by learning the key concepts and skills for this topic and we'll finish with AP style practice problems to help you apply what we've learned. Let's get started and remember, one topic at a time, one step closer to a five. So if we're going to start talking about what a sampling distribution is, well, we should probably start off with the definition. A sampling distribution of a statistic is the distribution of values of the statistic for all possible samples of a given size from a given population. Now let's be honest, if you're reading this or hearing this for the first time, you probably have no idea what that's talking about. Well, that's exactly what this video is going to cover, exactly what this definition means in a nice precise way that you could fully understand it. So let's just start off by talking about what a statistic is cuz we do see the word statistic pop up twice. A statistic is any numerical any numerical value that describes a sample. So if you have a sample of data and you have a number that's you're using to describe what you collected from that sample, that number is called a statistic. We have lots of different types of statistics. We got the proportion from a sample, a mean from a sample, a median from a sample, a range from a sample, and plenty others. But the two big ones that we focus on in this course more than anything else is the proportion from a sample. Like let's say we get a sample and it shows that 38% are boys. Or let's say we get a mean and we say, "Oh, we got a sample and the average height is 52 inches." Something like that lies. Those are the two most famous statistics that we work with, but we have learned plenty of other statistics. All right, let's dive into an example because I think the best way for you to understand a sampling distribution is to look at an example. So, let's look at an example with a sample proportion. Let's say that we know 27% of high school students in Texas own a bike. This means the population parameter is 0.27. That's not a P hat. That is the true population proportion. All right, this is again, this is the true one and only one value. Of all high school students in the entire state of Texas, we know that exactly 27% of them own a bike. Now, this is the one and true population parameter. But, here's where things get interesting. Now, imagine if a researcher were to select a random sample of 120 high school students from Texas and ask each if they own a bike. He or she would get what's called a sample proportion P hat. Now, we know the true population proportion is 27%, but that doesn't mean that a sample is going to match that exactly. This sample proportion would be considered a continuous random variable because before the researcher gets the final sample proportion value, the outcome is considered a random variable. And remember, what is a random variable? It is a numerical outcome of a chance process. So, when the researcher goes to get this sample of 120 high school students from the state of Texas, he or she has no idea what that sample proportion is going to be. Yes, the population proportion is 27%, but again, that doesn't mean the sample is going to be exactly 27% as well. So, that answer, the answer to the sample proportion is considered a random number because it's a number and we don't know what it is. Here are some examples. So, maybe we get 30 students that own a bike. That's 25% or maybe we get 31 students that own a bike and that's a little bit more than 25% or maybe we get 25 students that own a bike, and that's about 20.8%. The whole point is that there's lots of different options that could happen if you get a random group of 20 120 high school students and ask them if they own a bike or not, well, you might only get three. That's about 2.5%. Heck, you might get 91. That's 75.8%. But, the point is that there's lots of options. So, yes, the one true population proportion, the one true P, is 0.27. But, when we go and look at a sample, there are lots and lots and lots and lots and lots of possibilities for P hat, the sample proportion. So, the sampling distribution for the sample proportion would just show every single possible sample proportion possible from random samples taken from Texas high school students of sample size 120. And it also shows which values are more likely. So, again, let's go back to that definition of a sampling distribution. A sampling distribution shows you every possible value of a statistic. In this case, the sample proportion of students that own a bike in Texas from a sample of 120 Texas high school students. So, again, we know that when it comes to looking at sample proportions, there's lots and lots and lots and lots and lots and lots and lots can't say it enough different possibilities. A sampling distribution will show you every single one of those different possible sample proportions, and it will show you which ones are more likely. Now, you still might be a little bit confused, but again, it will start to come as we go through more and more of this video. Trust me. So, let's now look at a different example. This time we're going to look at example of sample means. Okay. Let's say the mean weight of all squirrels in the state of Pennsylvania is 565 g. This means that the population parameter mu, the true population mean, is 565 g. Again, this is the true mean of every single squirrel in the state of Pennsylvania. This is the one and only one true population parameter. But, now imagine if a researcher were to select a random sample of 40 squirrels from Pennsylvania and weigh each of them. Here we he or she could find the sample mean weight of the sample. Again, mu is the true population mean. That is one and only one value. But, if the researcher goes and gets a sample of 40 squirrels and looks at the mean of that sample, well, that's going to be an X bar and that number could vary. This sample mean could also be considered a continuous random variable. Again, because the before the researcher gets the final sample mean value, the outcome is a random number. Again, remember what a random number is. It's a numerical value that stems from a chance process. And before the researcher Now, again, the researcher knows the population mean is 565 g, but once that researcher gets that sample of 40 squirrels, he or she does not know what the sample mean is going to be and that's why it's considered a continuous random variable because it could be, well, lots of things. So, if the researcher gets a random sample of 40 squirrels, the mean weight could be 523 g, 325.7 g, 603.25 g, 125.75 g. I mean, there's just so many possibilities as to what that mean could be. Maybe it gets a couple heavier squirrels and it gets a higher value of 845 or even 1,025 or maybe it gets, you know, maybe some lower, smaller squirrels and it gets a mean of 485.1. The point is is yes, the population mean, the mean of all the squirrels in the state of Pennsylvania is 565 g. But, if we only look at a sample OF 40, WE'RE NOT guaranteed to get 565. We're going to get something different and that's going to be our sample mean, and well, sample means are going to vary. So, again, what does the sampling distribution show us? The sampling distribution for the sample mean would show every possible sample mean possible from random samples of size n equals 40 squirrels from Oh, that says Ohio. It should say Pennsylvania. Sorry about that typo. And it would show which values are more likely. So, again, remember our definition of a sampling distribution. A sampling distribution of a statistic is the distribution of all values of the sample statistic from all possible values of a given sample size. So, if the sample statistic that we're talking about is the proportion of kids in Texas that own a bike, well, then the sampling distribution would show all possible sample proportions of group of 120 students in Texas that own a bike. Or if that statistic is the sample mean weight of a sample of 40 squirrels, well, the sampling distribution would show every possible sample mean that's possible for a group of 40 squirrels. So, now the big question is, okay, now that we are slightly starting to understand what a sampling distribution is, how do we build one? Well, you start looking at samples. We take a sample of 120 Texas students, get a sample proportion, do another one, and another one, and another one, and then same thing with the squirrels. We get sample of 40 squirrels, a sample of 40 squirrels, a sample of 40 squirrels, and look at it the mean, look at the mean, look at the mean, and then we could start to look at all of them, and we could build a model that shows all of them, but that would take forever. So, the next thing we could do is simulate. The sampling distribution of a statistic can be simulated by repeatedly generating a large number of random samples from the population assuming known values for the parameter. The value of the statistic is determined and recorded for each sample. The resulting distribution of the sample statistic values approximate the sampling distribution. So, essentially what this is saying is to approximate what the sampling distribution going to look like. We can simulate a sample, record its sample statistic, simulate a sample, record its sample statistic, and eventually, after recording a bunch of possible sample statistics, we can get idea of what that's going to look like. So, for example, let's just say, again, it was true that 27% of kids in Texas, high school students in Texas, own their own bike. What we could do is simulate getting out a sample and of 120, and we would say, "Oh my gosh, this sample was 41%." So, we put a dot at 41%. Oh, the next sample was 20%. We put a dot at 20%. Oh, the next sample was 30%. We get a dot at 30%. Oh, the next sample was also 30%. We put another dot there. And every single dot would represent the sample proportion. And maybe we get a weird sample that shows 70% or another weird sample that only shows 2%, but if we look at more and more and more and more and more and more samples, we would get more and more and more and more and more sample proportions, and they would start to stack up on each other just like this, and we'd say, "Oh my gosh, notice that most of them are stacking up around 27%." Well, that's what's true. If 27% is true, we would expect a sample proportion to be 27%. It would be weird to be really, really high or really, really low. Now, 30% would not be weird. 26%, 25%, 20%, 21%, those would not be weird cuz those are all near 27%, but most sample proportions would start to be near 27%. And what we start to build here is a picture of all possible sample proportions, which is called a sampling distribution. We can do the same thing for the squirrels. If we knew that the true mean was 565 g, and we say, "All right, let's start looking at samples of 40. Let's simulate looking at samples of 40 squirrels." Maybe we get a sample mean of 558, so we put a dot right there. Maybe we get another sample with 572. Another sample with 560. And then we start to put dots at all the different possible values. But guess what? If the true mean is 565, getting a sample way over here is possible, but very unlikely. Getting a sample way down here is possible, but pretty unlikely. Because guess what? The truth is 565. So, most sample means would start to stack up closer and closer to 565. Yeah, 572 is just a little bit above. That's not too weird. 570, 570, 570. Yeah, 558 is just a little bit lower, not too weird. But most samples would start to stack up around the truth. And this distribution, this picture that I'm making, is the beginning of a sampling distribution showing every possible statistic from the samples. So, again, every one of these dots represents a sample mean of 40 squirrels. And yes, some are going to be on the high side and some are going to be on the low side, but most should be in the middle near that 565. All right. So, the best part is this. The sampling distribution that shows all possible sample proportions or all possible sample means has a very familiar characteristic. If you noticed those last two pictures I drew, you might have noticed that it was approximately normal. So, here's the cool thing. All sampling distributions, there's a couple conditions that we're going to learn about in the future, but for right now, sampling distributions will be normal. Meaning most sample distributions or most samples are going to stack up around the population value. Very few on the low side, very few on the high side. Same thing with proportions. Most are going to stack up around the truth of 27%. Some a little bit lower, some a little bit higher, and it's going to follow that kind of normal distribution. So, here's what we're saying. Is if we look at 120 Texas students, we would expect the majority of samples to stack up around 27%. Maybe a little bit higher, maybe a little bit lower, but that's where we should see the large majority I'm going to shade this in. The large majority of samples. Samples on the real high end, 40%, 50%, those should be unlikely. Why? Because the truth is 27%. Samples on the low end, 5%, 10%, 11%, those should be very unlikely. Why? Because the truth is 27%. Most samples should be somewhat close to the truth. And again, same thing for the squirrels. Here would be a beautiful picture of this. We would expect the majority of samples to stack up around the truth of 565. Being a little bit on the higher side would not be weird. Being a little bit on the lower side would not be weird. But being really, you know, having a sample of 40 squirrels being like 800, that would be strange. Again, why? Because the average is 565. Or getting a sample way down here of maybe 125 lb or 125 g. That would be very weird because most squirrels weigh 565. To get a sample like this, you'd have to have a whole bunch of really, really small squirrels. But that's unlikely to happen. What's likely to happen is that you're going to get a bunch of average squirrels, and that's why you're going to get something near the mean. Now, if you're still struggling to understand this, there's this really cool app that I'm going to show you here in a second that can actually simulate these kind of things. So, let's look at the first one here. Now, this one's for proportions. Now, this is designed to look at the proportion of candies that are orange in a jar. But we can kind of pretend that it's not candies, it's the proportion of students that own a bike in Texas. So, we can actually set the population proportion, so I set it there to be 27%, and we could select the sample size, in this case 120, and then we could actually have it look at Let's just do one sample at a time. So, what this is going to do is it's going to select one sample. There it is. And it's going to show you the result. So, this one sample taken from a population where the proportion was 27% the sample was 0.283. And even put a little dot. You can barely see it there. It's real small. But I put a little dot at 0.283. And we can do another one, right? We can do another one. This one was 0.283 as well, were the chances. And we can do another one here. This one was 0.25. Little bit on the lower side. Here's another one, 0.325. The point is that if I start taking out sample after sample, they're all going to, well, be different values. But here's the cool thing about this app is it allows me to simulate. So, instead of looking at one sample of 120 students at a time, let's look at 300. So, let's look at 300 samples all at once. All right, it's going to go through them really, really quickly and boom, there it is. Now, what do you notice about this distribution? First, it centers around 27%. The majority of samples were near 27% cuz that's what's true. Higher values above 35% were unlikely. Lower values below 20% were also unlikely. But this right here is a picture of a sampling distribution. Now, it's not the sampling distribution because remember, the sampling distribution shows you every possible sample proportion. We only ran 300 samples, so we're not necessarily looking at all of them. But we're starting to build it and we already see that it's looking normal. And I can actually do another 300. Boom. Another 300. So, now we're really starting to build the sampling distribution showing all possible sample proportions from this population, from samples of size 120, where 27% is true. But again, notice the shape. It's normal. Samples on the high end and low end are less likely. Most sample proportions are going to stack up near the middle. Now, we can also do one like this for the mean. Now, I can't do the scroll problem, but this is a tree problem looking at the uh heights of trees, I believe. Now, here's what's cool about this. Uh this is actually looking at the length of trees, maybe like the diameter. Okay. So, we could set a very big population here of like 26,800 trees. And notice that down here it shows the population. This is the distribution of the population. Actually looks skewed right. Okay, that's an important thing to notice. But let's start looking at samples. Okay. Let's look at one sample and let's look at size four. The sample size four. So, we're going to draw the sample and notice it shows us two things. In the middle here, right where I'm kind of circling with my mouse, we see the results from that one sample. Again, looking at 40 trees and the diameter. Now, from that sample of 40 trees, the mean was 4.125. So, now on the far right here, we're going to put a dot at 4.125. So, this is the beginning of our sampling distribution. So, this is actually kind of cool. So, on the left side here, we have the population of all trees. In the middle, we have the sample of just our 40 trees that we looked at. And on the right here is the beginning of a sampling distribution for the sample mean from that one sample. But let's look at 100 samples all at once. Way faster. Okay, boom. Now, notice it's starting to look normal. We're starting to get the truth centered around the population mean, which is 4.295. So, we're starting to see the center there. Means on the high side are less and less likely. Means on the low side are less and less likely. And then let's look at another 200 samples and another 200 samples and another 200 samples. All right, again, population skewed right. Even one sample here in the middle would also be skewed right. Again, if the population skewed right, and then you take a sample from that population, there's a good chance that the sample's also going to be skewed right. But here's the best part, the sampling distribution showing all possible sample means from many, many, many samples is going to be normal. How awesome is this? The center is going to be right around the population mean, and then sample means on the high side and low side are less and less likely. So, I hope maybe that app kind of showed you one final way to really understand what a sampling distribution is and how we know they're going to be normal. All right, now let's look at a couple examples. So, researchers have found that the mean amount of time teenagers brush their teeth is 185 seconds. So, that is mu, the true population mean time if for kids to brush their teeth, teenagers, 185 seconds. But let's look at samples of size 50. And let's look at a simulation of 100 samples of each of size 50. So, the first question is, explain what each dot represents. So, each dot represents the mean from one particular sample. Okay? So, for example, this dot right here was the mean from a sample of 50 teenagers, and that one sample mean was 173. And here's another one, right? This one right here would be about a sample mean of 192. But all these dots, there's 100 of them for the 100 samples, each dot represents the sample mean from that sample. Now, this is not a sampling distribution cuz it only shows 100 results. A sampling distribution would show every possible sample mean from samples of size 50. So, this is the start of a sampling distribution. But we already notice that it's approximately normal, which is the next question, describe the sampling distribution and justify its shape. Well, notice it's centered around 185. That makes complete sense because if the population mean is 185, most samples should be near that. Few samples on the high side, few samples on the low side, which gives it that normal shape. Pretty cool, pretty simple. Here's one more example. This time we're looking at proportions. A streaming company claims that 60% of teenagers in the United States use their streaming platform daily. So again, that's the population proportion P, 0.60. But if we look at random samples of size 150, what could the sample proportions be? Well, it doesn't have to be 60%, but my guess would be most would be near it because that's true. So if we were to simulate 200 samples, what would it look like? Well, again, the majority of samples would stack up near 60%. Now some might be a little bit lower, a little bit higher, but the majority of samples and sorry my dots look so terrible here, but the majority of samples would be very, very close. 90%, 100%, possible but very unlikely, probably going to happen one or two times. And 10%, 20%, 25%, probably very unlikely, but might happen every now and then. Most samples are going to stack up near the truth. Now technically any value is possible, but if the truth is 60%, they're not all going to be likely or equally likely. Like a 10% is not going to be just as likely as a 60 or a 90%. 60% should be way more likely because that's the true population proportion. So again, we start to see that awesome normal distribution where the majority of values for the sampling distribution, where each value shows a sample proportion, are going to be pretty close that 60% and then a couple on the low end and a couple on the high end, giving it that beautiful normal shape. All right, that's it. I know it was a lot, but this is such an important concept that's going to really kind of cascade into everything in unit three and unit four. So if you can understand today what a sampling distribution is and how we can represent one through simulations of looking at many, many, many samples, it's going to go so far to helping you understand everything that's about to come next in units three and units four. All right, hopefully it made sense. Best of luck.

Unit 1 review
Hey stat stars, welcome to the unit one part A summary review video covering exploring one variable data. Now before we get started, I want to mention one quick thing. The AP statistics course and exam description has recently been updated. So some of the topic numbers I've referenced throughout this video may not perfectly match the new curriculum. However, the good news is that the content itself has not changed. The concepts, vocabulary, definitions, statistical techniques, and problems solving skills covered in this video are all still essential for success in AP Statistics. So, if you're looking for a comprehensive review of exploring one variable data, you're in the right place. Everything you need to know is right here. So, sit back, grab your notes, and let's review the key concepts together. And don't forget to check out the ultimate review packet for AP Statistics. Inside you'll find study guides, guided notes, practice worksheets, review videos, answer keys, and many other resources designed to help you prepare for your unit test throughout the year and ultimately for success on the AP statistics exam in May. Let's get started. Unit one is all about exploring one variable data. We're really going to learn how to analyze one variable or how to take one variable and compare it across multiple samples or multiple groups. Now listen, understanding how to analyze data is super important. May seem kind of boring and not that fun at the beginning, but what we need to do with analyzing data later on in statistics is so crucial to the really the big important concepts that are probably going to be the most challenging for you. So if you understand how to analyze data now, it's going to pay off big time at the end when we do some really important stuff. Now listen, this unit is really broken down into two things. Categorical data and quantitative data. And I'm not going to lie to you. Categorical data is way easier, way faster, way shorter. In fact, only a small percentage of this entire unit is even about categorical data. Much much bigger part of the unit is over quantitative data. But regardless of categorical or quantitative variables, there's something really important that you need to understand. Anytime you select a sample and from that sample you collect data. Any summary information that you learn from that sample data is called a statistic. Whereas if you collect information or if you collect data from an entire population then anything you learn from that population is called a parameter. It's really easy to memorize these things because it basically here's the idea. Six starts with an S and so does samples and statistics come from samples. parameter starts with a P and parameters come from populations which also serve with a P. So it's pretty easy to remember that concept. Now we collect data from individuals and individuals can be well honestly anything. It can be a person. It can be a chair. It can be a tree. It can be a lake. It can be a state. It can be a country. It can be a day for that. All that matters really an individual can be anything. Now here's the most important part. A variable is any characteristic that can change from one individual to another. So if you just think about a person or maybe multiple people, think about any characteristic that can change from one to another. Eye color, hair color, weight, height, just to name a few. Now the reason why we like analyzing data so much is because individuals vary. If individuals didn't vary, well then honestly we wouldn't even need this course and the world would be a pretty boring place. Now here's the deal with variables. There's only two types. All variables in the world could be categorized into two types. Either categorical variables or quantitative variables. A categorical variable takes on values that are category names or group labels like eye color or hair color. Whereas a quantitative variable takes on numerical values that are either measured or counted like the weight of a frog or how many candies are in a bag. To try to keep it really simple, a categorical variable value is simply going to be a word. Whereas a quantitative variable value is typically going to be a number. Now there are a couple exceptions to that rule, namely zip code. Zip code is a number, but it's not measured and it's not counted. That doesn't make it quantitative. A zip code is simply a number that tells your mail where to go, which means it simply puts your mail into a specific category for your city's post office. So, that's why zip code is one of those weird exceptions that's a number, but it's technically a categorical variable. But to be honest, in most cases, it's pretty straightforward. Categorical variables are words. Quantitative variables are numbers. Let's start off with categorical data because it really is shorter and much faster to talk about. There's just not a whole lot there. Now, let's say that we take a sample of 89 lemurs and one of the variables that we want to analyze from those lemurs is the type of lemur it is. Whether it's a cyica, an i, a ringtail, or a mouse. And I'm probably pronouncing some of those wrong, but again, those are all words, which makes this a categorical variable. Now, if we just have all that data collected, it's probably going to be a really long, boring list of all those different categories. So the first thing we like to do is organize that into what we call a frequency table. Frequency is just a fancy word for counts. Here we list each of the categories and we simply count how many of the lemurs fit into each of those categories. Now we could also take a look at what's called the relative frequency. The relative frequency is just the proportion of lemurs that fell into each category. So for example, we take the number of ringtail lemurs that we have, we divide by 89 and we get the proportion. Now, keep in mind that a relative frequency, a percentage, or a rate all tell us the exact same information that a proportion does. They're all really basically the same thing. However, we really do like using proportions. I'm not trying to say that we're never going to use frequencies at all. Like relative frequencies a lot because when we are comparing two samples, especially two samples that different sizes, using relative frequencies is a much more fair way to compare them. When it comes to making graphs of categorical data, we really have two options. Pie charts or what some people call circle graphs and bar graphs. Now, a bar graph could also be turned into what's called a relative bar graph. So, instead of the heights of each bar showing the frequency or the number of lemurs that fall into each category, it simply shows the proportion. Whereas a circle graph only shows proportions because the idea is each slice is a proportion of the whole circle. Now when we look at a pie chart or a bar graph, one thing that you might be asked to do is to describe the distribution of that variable. Now what is a distribution? That's a really important word for this entire unit. A distribution of data is basically what values that that data takes on and how often it takes on those values. So if we're asked to talk about the distribution of categorical data, really all we could say is maybe which category had the most, which category had the least, and maybe we could even mention all the different categories that are even available to us. But there's not a whole lot we can say. Often times the best things we can do with either a bar graph or a pie chart is compare two different samples. So for example, here we see a pie chart for the lemurs in forest one, a pie chart for the lemurs in forest 2. And because pie charts are based on proportions, it's really easy to see some important differences. Like we notice in forest 2, there's a much higher proportion of ciscas than there is in force one. And we simply know that by just seeing that the piece of that pie is much bigger in forest 2 than forest one. Now, what it's going to be expected of you to answer questions about on the AP exam when it comes to categorical variables is really again, like I said, just describe the distribution, reading a bar graph, also noticing if it's a relative bar graph, so you can see what proportion or what percentage of data falls into each category. Now, let's move on to quantitative variables, which are going to take up way more time in this video. First, we have two different types of quantitative variables, discrete and continuous. A discrete quantitative variable takes on values that are countable infinite. For example, the number of goals that you could score in a soccer game. Well, that's going to be 0 1 2 3 4 5. It may say, well, I guess it can be infinite. You could have a million goals in a game, but again, realistically, no, you can't. So, typically with a discrete quantitative variable, we're thinking whole numbers only. And if we think about it, you could make a list of all possible outcomes and wouldn't necessarily go on forever. Whereas a continuous quantitative variable takes on values that are not countable and basically theoretically could be infinite. For example, the weight of a frog. If you think about the weight of a frog, it really could go infinite in either directions, especially when you have a really good measuring tool. Because if you have a good measuring tool that maybe goes to say five decimal places, well, even if you're talking about between 10 pounds and 11 pounds, which actually would be a pretty big frog. Let's shrink that down a little bit. Let's say between five and six pounds realistically, right? You have to understand, I hope you all know this, between five and six pounds, there's an infinite number of values. Right? Now, even if you say, "Well, we're only going to go to two decimal places, so there's not an infinite number of values." Okay? Well, there's still a lot, and you wouldn't want to sit and count them all. But again, hypothetically, from five to six pounds, there is an infinite number of possibilities, especially if you add some really precise measuring tool. So discrete, we're thinking countable set number of outcomes that are typically whole numbers. Whereas continuous, we got way too many of them to even count because we got decimals upon decimals upon decimals that make for a truly continuous variable that can take on infinite outcomes, even when it's really not infinite. Quantitative variables can also be analyzed into what we call a frequency table or a relative frequency table. But because we don't have categories or names, we have numbers. The first thing we have to do is create bins of basically intervals, right? So each bin or interval has to be equal in size. So here we have data from a sample of trees and from every tree we measured the treere's height and we have bins of 20 to 30 feet, 30 to 40 feet and so forth. These bins are what we call left-handed bins, which means you equal a number on the left and you go up to the number on the right. So that first bid is for any tree from 20 up to 29.999999999999 ft. If a tree weighed or if weighed if a tree had 30 feet of height, it would go into the next bin. So again, once we set up our bins, and you can set the bins however you want. You could choose whatever interval you want. It just has to be consistent. Then you just go through your data and you count. Okay, how many trees were 20 to the 30 ft? count them up and that's again the frequency or you could obviously take that value divide it by the total of 174 total trees in the sample and you can get the relative frequency as well. Now there are four types of graphs that can be made from quantitative data. A dot plot, a stem and leaf plot, a histogram and a cumulative graph. Now let's look at our sample of 174 trees and from every tree we measured its height which is a quantitative variable. first off because it's a number technically be continuous because the height of a tree if you got a really precise measuring tool could be any value but again you get the idea. Now here is an example of a stem and leaf plot. Cool thing about a stem and leaf plot is you can actually see all the individual values and they just stack up so you could see the distribution. Then we have a dot plot that puts dots for each individual tree and we could also see where they stack up. We see there's a far less trees on the left, far less trees on the right. most trees kind of in the middle about 80 ft. Then what we have is called a histogram. I'll probably say that a histogram is the number one preferred graph for quantitative data in all statistics. Once again across the x-axis we see those bins or intervals 20 to 30, 30 to 40, 40 to 50. And then we simply count how many trees fall into each bit and then we make a bar that goes up to that count or that frequency. You can also make it a relative frequency histogram as well where that bar goes up to the proportion instead of the count. Now listen, I know it looks like a bar graph. It might smell like a bar graph. It might even taste like a bar graph, but it's not a bar graph. Bar graphs are for categorical data. Don't ever call a histogram a bar graph. You'll offend a statistician somewhere. The really cool thing about it, whether it's a stem and leaf plot or it's a dot plot or if it's a histogram, is that you can see the distribution. Remember the distribution is what values your variable can take on and how often it takes them on. So by looking at these distributions we could clearly see where there's less data and where there's more data. What heights are most common versus what he types are least common. Now the fourth type of graph is called a cumulative graph. These are really cool graphs that you actually don't see too often but they're really really valuable. Now here we see a bunch of dots connected by lines. Now every dot has an x and it has a y. For example, there's a dot at 80 on the X, that's 80 feet, and 0.45 on the Y. Now, what that means is that 45% of all the trees in our sample were below 80 ft. So, again, every dot tells you the proportion of data below that particular height. Now, if we look in between, we see that the slopes of the lines connected the dots are different. A steeper slope simply means that there's more data in that range. So we see that there's a large amount of data from 60 to 70 and also a large amount from 70 to 80. That's where we see steeper lines. If the line is horizontal like we see between 0 and 10 or 10 to 20, that means there is no data in those bins whatsoever because there was no change from one to the other. These are great graphs as well to see some really important information about how the data builds up, where there's a lot of data, where there's a little data, all through this idea of looking at the steepness of the lines and understand that each point tells you the proportion of data below that particular height. Make sure that you know how to analyze these different graphs and be able to answer questions about them. For example, if we look at the histogram, I could say, hey, how many trees are greater than 70 ft? How many trees are less than 70 feet? How many trees between 100 and 120 ft? You got to be able to answer all those questions. It's pretty simple again to be able to add them up. Make sure you get a rough count as to how many are in each bin. But also make sure if you're looking at histogram, is it a frequency histogram where it shows how many trees are in each bin or is it a relative frequency histogram where it shows what proportion are each in each bin. So it's really important to use all those kind of facts and ideas to answer questions about these different graphs. But for the most part, they're pretty easy questions. In this unit, one of the most important things that you're going to be asked to do is to describe the distribution of a quantitative variable by looking at a graph. Now, when you do this, there's four things that you have to mention. The shape, the center, the spread, and any outliers or other unusual features. Now, when we look at shape, there's lots of different things we could say. Unimodal, biodal, gap, clusters, symmetric, skewed left, skewed right. When we talk about the center, you're looking for one value that you think best summarize all the data. Spread is really analysis of how the data varies. And then again, outliers are data values that are very far away from all the other values, whether it be far to the left or far to the right. Let's take a look at several graphs that I've made for you that are going to enable us to well talk about the distributions. Now, every single graph represents a sample of trees selected from all different parts of a forest. Every single sample had roughly 174 trees. And we're going to see how that sample shook out. Now, in these first two graphs, we see the shape of symmetric, but they're both symmetric in different ways. Now, the pink graph is symmetric with most of the data in the middle. So, it's going to have a smaller spread. Yes, the overall data does go from 20 to 140, but the majority of data is clustered in the middle near the center of around 80 to 85 ft. Whereas the graph on the bottom also has a center of 80 to 85 ft. But that would be called biodal because we see a big chunk of data on the left and another big peak of data on the right. Now even though 80 is probably a good center of the data, it's actually not really a good description of the data because there's actually two centers because it looks like we have two clusters of data. So we got a bunch of smaller trees centered maybe around 35 ft and a bunch of larger trees centered maybe around 120 ft. This one's going to be way more spread out. it's going to vary much much more because we got so many different trees on the left and so many different trees on the right end of the scale. Whereas the graph in pink has a much smaller spread because the majority of data is all well clumped together in the middle. Here we see two more samples of trees. The one in purple is clearly skewed to the left where the majority of the data is on the right. So the center is probably around I don't know 120 to 110 ft. And on the one in blue, we see it's skewed to the right, which gives us a center of maybe 35 to 40 ft. Now, they both have similar spreads, but again, the majority of the data in purple is at the higher end, where the majority of the data in the blue is at the lower end. Here we have two more graphs that are both symmetric. But with the biggest difference between these two graphs is how spread out they are. The one in green is far less spread out than the one in purple. In green, we have a center of 80, but it's all clustered together from 60 feet to 100 feet. Whereas in purple, we also have a center probably around 80 feet, but it's very evenly spread from 20 all the way up to 140. When your data is very evenly spread like this, we typically call it uniform. In this last example, we see a very unusual feature of a huge gap. We have a couple trees ranging from 20 to 40 feet at the bottom. Then we have an enormous gap where there's no trees at all. And then we have a bunch of trees 80 all the way to 130 with a couple there above 130 ft. Now here we could also say that this graph is maybe slightly skewed to the left. And again describing the center is kind of tough because you might want to jump and say something like 70, but there's not a single tree at 70. A better center here would be looking at maybe 110. Yes, there's a couple trees at the very bottom, but typically trees in this sample are about 110 ft, maybe even say 115. Now, we don't know for sure, but we'll learn a little bit more about this in a couple moments about outliers, but those trees at the bottom definitely look like they could be outliers. Now, in any of these graphs that we've just taken a look at, we got to make sure that we describe the distribution in context. So, if you go back and pause, you can read my descriptions and how I give a quick explanation of the shape, the center, and the spread, and if there's any unusual features in every graph. It really doesn't take a whole lot to describe a distribution, but you got to make sure you mention those four key details. Now, I got to be honest, when you just have the graph of a distribution of a quantitative variable, there's really not a whole lot you could say about the distribution. So, you kind of have to be a little bit vague. But, if you actually have all the individual values, there's so much more we could do. Let's start off by talking about measures of center. Here we're talking about the mean and the median. Now, these are both the most famous measures of center. The mean is found simply by adding all the values together and dividing by how many you have. It's a pretty simple formula. But the mean is influ easily influenced by outliers. Remember, the mean is trying to balance everything out. And if there's one really really large outlier, the mean's going to move up a little bit because of it to keep it balanced. That one large outlier might only be one value, but it weighs just as much as a bunch of the other small values. Now, the median is simply the middle value. No matter what, if you have an odd amount of data points, then there is an exact median in the middle. If you have an even number of data points in AP Statistics, we just take the average of the middle two values. Now, there is no formula to tell you what the median is. You simply have to put your data in order and find the middle. But there is there is one really cool thing you could do that's going to help you and that is by using the formula n + 1 / 2. This formula will not tell you what the median is, but it will tell you the location of the median if your data is in order. For example, if you have 19 pieces of data, 19 + 1 is 20, 20 divided 2 is 10. That means that the median is the 10th value. If you have 20 pieces of data, 20 + 1 is 21id by 2 is 10 12. That means that the median is located between the tenth and the 11th value. So find the tenth's value, find the 11th value, and average them together to get your median. Now, the median is not influenced by outliers because you could have an absolutely enormous outlaw on the far left or the far right. And the median doesn't care at all because he or she is just sitting pretty right in the middle. That value on the left could go as far as it wants away and it's not going to affect the median at all, but it will affect the mean. Now, what's really important for you to know when it comes to the mean and the median for AP statistics is this. When your data is roughly symmetric, the mean and the median will be pretty close together. So, even if you don't have a picture of your data and you're like, I don't know what the shape is, but you do have the mean and the median and they're really, really close to each other, then that's telling you that your data is symmetric. When you are skewed to the left, the mean is going to be smaller than the median. When you're skewed to the right, the mean is going to be larger than the median. We can actually see this pretty clearly in these four graphs. And the top two graphs are both symmetric, albeit in different ways, but because they're symmetric, the mean and the median are going to be about the same place. The arrow represents the mean, and the M represents the median. Now, the official symbol that we have for a mean of a sample is Xbar. It's X with a little bar over top of it. We don't really have any official symbol for the median. you just maybe use an M or right after the word median. Now, when data again like I already mentioned is skewed to the left like this purple graph, the mean the arrow is going to be a little bit less than the median. And when your data is skewed to the right like in blue, the mean the arrow is going to be a little bit greater than the median. Now, let's talk about why very quickly. Well, for example, in that blue graph, yes, the majority of data is at the bottom to the lower values, but those higher trees, because this is our tree data, even though there's only a couple of them at that far right, they are heavier. They're they're they're worth more, right? That they're they're of bigger value to the data set, and the meat has to take them into account. So, even though there's only a couple of them, they have more weight to them, if that makes sense. That's going to pull the meat higher. Now, we also have what are known as measures of position. These are values that tell you where you are in the data. Now, probably one of the most famous is what's called a percentile. You might hear this all the time, especially working with ACT or ACT scores. A percentile or a a particular values percentile is the percentage of data at or below that score. So, for example, maybe you take the SAT and you find out that you score at the 95th percentile. That means that 95% of other students scored at your level or below, which means 5% were above you. So that tells you your position in the data is pretty good. You're at the high end. Now, we also have what's known as the first quartile. The first quartile is known as the 25th percentile. Think of it as the middle of the bottom half of your data. 25% of data is below it. 75% of data is above it. The median, which we already know is the middle of our data, is actually known as the 50th percentile because 50% of data is below it, 50% is above it. And the third quartile, also known as Q3, is known as the 75th percentile. It has 75% of data below it, 25% of data above it. So these are just some important percentiles, but really a percentile can be any value. For example, the 42nd percentile has 42% of data at or below it. But again, percentiles really specifically tell you where you fall in the data. Next up, we have measures of spread. There are three measures of spread. Range, which is simply your max minus your min. Now, that's going to be very easily influenced by outliers. So, if you have an outline in your data, it's going to make your range look huge, whereas realistically the overall range of your data might not be that big because that outlier. Then we have what's known as the IQR. That stands for interquartile range. This is the range of the middle 50% of your data from Q3 to Q1. So finding it's really easy. Just take the third quartile and subtract the first quartile. Lastly, we have probably the most common and most used and most famous measures of spread, the standard deviation. The standard deviation is a pretty complicated formula which you see here, but honestly, you're always going to use technology to find it for the most part or you'll be given it. But what's more important is that you know what the standard deviation represents. It represents how far majority of data is from the mean. So if you have a very large standard deviation that tells you typically most of your data is very far from the mean whether above or below. If you have a very small standard deviation that means that most of your data is very close to the mean in the middle not too far above not too far below. Now could there still be some data further and further away whether it be above or below? Of course. But again it's speaking to where the majority of the data falls. Lastly, we have outliers. Now, when you're looking at a graph, you might just kind of vaguely say that value looks like it could be an outlier or maybe it's not. But now, we have actually specific ways to measure or determine if you have outliers in your data. Now, there are two of them and which one to use really depends upon what information you have. If you have your quartortiles, then what you could use will be called the fence method. So, we basically find the upper fence and the lower fence. The upper fence is found by taking Q3, the third quartile, and adding 1.5 times the IQR. And if any value in your data is above that number, which you just calculated as your upper fence, then it is an outlier. You could have one, you could have none, you could have five or six, who knows? To find the lower fence, you take Q1, the first quartortile, subtract 1.5 times your IQR, and that gives you your lower fence. Any value in your data set below that number is considered an outlier. Again, you could have none, one, two, more, more, however many you got. Now, the second way that you can determine outliers is using your mean and standard deviation. Now, remember, we know that the majority of data is within one standard deviation of the mean because that's well what's typical. So, we identify outliers any value that is more than two standard deviations either above or below the mean. So if you take your mean and you add two standard deviations and then you take your mean and you subtract two standard deviations, you get an interval. Any values in your data that's outside of that interval would be considered outliers. Now, I'm going to be honest with you, the fence method is probably the most famous method to find outliers, but the med standard deviation method certainly works. But again, it all depends what you have. If you don't know the mean standard deviation, all you have is your cortiles, then you're going to use the fence method. If you have your mean and your standard deviation, then you could certainly use that method as well to determine if you have any outliers in your data. Now that we've very quickly gone over all the different summary statistics, let's talk about how they can be transformed if your data is transformed. Now, there's two different ways to transform your data. First, we could take every single data value that we have and we could add a value to them all. We could subtract the value to them all or we could multiply all the values. Now, how does that impact the different measures of sum statistics that we just learned? Well, addition and subtraction affect measures of center and measures of position. If you add five to all your values, your mean's going to go up five. Your mean's going to go up five. The third quartile is going to go up five. The 25th percentile is going to go up five. The 42nd percentile is going to go up five. But what will not change is measures of spread, range, standard deviation, and IQR. they are not affected at all by adding or subtracting values to all of your data. However, if you multiply all of your data by a specific value, that will affect all measures of statistics. That's going to affect measures of center. So, if you multiply all your data by 0.2, for example, mean, median are going to multiply by 0.2. Range, IQR, standard deviation, they're going to buy multiply by 0.2. And same with all your measures of position. Basically, everything will be multiplied by 0.2. Now, if you're going to transform them in two ways, maybe you're going to multiply and then add, just note that the multiplication affects everything. Measure of center, measure of spread, and measures of position. But the measures of spread will not add whatever that constant is. Now, the second way we could transform data is by adding data to our data set or taking data away. Now, it's really important for you to understand that it's where that value is. So, if you have a data set and you add a huge enormous outlier in the far right, well, your median is not going to change much at all. It might move over a little bit because you are you are adding a new data to your data set, but it's not going to change much. Whereas, the mean is going to definitely get bigger because of that really big outlier. Remember, the mean has to take every values value into account. If you add a value that weighs a whole lot, it's going to make the mean go high. Now, if you add a new value and it's just like all the other values, it's kind of right in the middle. Then once again, your median's not going to change a whole lot and your mean's not going to change much either. All right, that's it for summary statistics. There's a lot to go on there and a lot of new things we learned, but you know, feel free to take the time to make sure you review it all and that it all makes sense to you. Now, taking together the min, Q1, the median, Q3, and the maximum are known as the five number summary. And what we could do with the five number summary is create a box plot which is a really cool graphical representation of our summary statistics. Now what we do is we make a box around Q1 and Q3 with the median somewhere in between there. Then in AP statistics we use what's called a modified box plot. So first we identify outliers using our fence method. We put asterisks at those outliers. Then the whiskers of the box plot go to the next highest or lowest values that were not outliers. Here we see an example of a box plot. And the most important thing is that each section of that box plot represents 25% of our data. Now note that I have an outlier there on the far right. And that that whisker went to the next value in my data that was not deemed an outlier. Now the five number summary breaks the data down into 25% chunks. A wider whisker on the far right does not mean more data. It just means that that section of the data is more spread out. So each chunk below Q1 in between Q1 the median in between the median and Q3 and from Q3 all the way to that outlier represents 25% of data. Wider simply means more spread out. It doesn't mean more data. Now the cool thing is through a box plot you can also see the shape. You clearly see the shape of this data is skewed to the right because 50% of the data is towards the bottom kind of clustered together and then the upper 50% of data is way more spread out. So we visualize that as a skewed right graph. Here we see two more box plots that are symmetric. This is going back to those pink and orange graphs that were both symmetric in different ways. And now you can actually see that in these box plots. The first one is spread out with some outliers on the left and outliers on the right. But we see our whiskers are about the same size. That means they have about equal spread on the left and right. Now the median's not right smack dab in the middle of the box. And that's okay, but still pretty evenly balanced, which represents symmetry. Then the bottom graph, we see that the data is way more spread out. Look at that middle 50% in the box is way more spread out. That's because to grab the majority of the data, the box has to go way to the left. and way to the right because again, look at the histogram. The majority of data is way to the left and way to the right. So, the middle 50% is going to be way wider to capture that data. Now that we've learned all the different summary statistics for a quantitative variable, we can see how they all kind of fit together and really tell us a lot about the data. And one thing that the AP statistics exam loves to do is give you a set of summary statistics and have you complete some tasks with it. So here we're going to take a look at another set of 174 trees where the height of each tree was measured. Now across the top we see the summary statistics, the mean, the median, min, Q1, Q3, the max and standard deviation. And the first thing I notice is that the mean is lower than the median. So the data has a shape that is skewed left. Also the median is closer to the third quartile than it is the first quartile. Now what that means is that because there is more distance between the first quartile and the median does not mean there's more data. It just means that section of data is more spread out. We also notice that the third quartile is closer to the max than the first quartile is closer to the mean. Meaning that the distance between the first quartile and the min is extremely far which again is showing that that side of the data the left side of the data is more spread out. All signs point to the bottom 50% of the data being more spread out than the top 50% which makes our data skew to the left. Another very common question has you analyze the standard deviation. The standard deviation tells us the majority of trees in this sample are within 28.96 ft of the mean of 104.82 ft. Remember the standard deviation tells you how far typical data is from the mean and within means plus or minus. So if we take our mean and we add 28.96, we subtract 28.96, that tells us where the majority of our data falls. Now that standard deviation is kind of large to be quite honest, which is again another sign that our data is fairly spread out. Now they also love asking you to talk about outliers. So remember we have two different outlier formulas. In red I have the fence method here. We're taking the uh third quartile 125. We're adding 1.5 * the IQR which is Q3 minus Q1 and we get 185. Now the first thing I notice the max is only 135 which means that there is obviously no values bigger than 185. So there's no upper outliers. Now the lower fence is Q1 85 minus 1.5 * the RQR and we get 25 here. Now the min is 22 which is below 25. So we for sure know that we have at least one outlier the 22 ft tree. But the idea here is without knowing every single individual data point. There could be more outliers like for example there could be a tree that's 23 or a tree that's 24 ft that would again be below 25. But we don't know all those values. is we only know the mean. And so that's why it's important to make sure we emphasize that there's only at least one outlier. There could be more, but without the data, we don't know. We could also use our mean and standard deviation formula by taking the mean, adding two, and subtracting two standard deviations. Here we get an interval where we know a large large majority of our data falls and any values outside this would be deemed outliers. Now the top of that interval is 162.74 ft. And again with our max of 135. There's clearly no outliers on that top end. But here we have a 46.9 the low end which would tell us that any tree including that min of 22 would definitely be considered an outlier. Now here we see a box plot that I actually created for this data. Now if you're asked to make a modified box plot, you do need to show the outliers. So I actually had all this data and there was one other tree at 23 ft. So that's why you see two dots there 22 and 23 and then that whisker goes to the next value looks to be about 30 that was not an outlier. Now again we see where the Q1 the median Q3 and that max value fall. Now sometimes on the AP exam if you don't actually have all the data you only have your five number summary they'll tell you to just make a regular box plot not showing any outliers because you could certainly do that with the five number summary alone. All right that's it for this example. Hopefully that made a lot of sense. Now, another really important task that very often comes up on the AP stats exam, whether it be a multiple choice or an F FRQ, is comparing two different distributions. Maybe we have two histograms, two box plots, um, or even two stem and leaf plots, which we could call backtoback stem and leaf plot. But through any of these things, we want to make sure we compare. And when we compare, please make sure that we use comparative language like greater than, less than, um, bigger, smaller, higher, lower, all those different things. Or, or even, hey, they're just flat out the same. Now, when you're comparing, we want to compare the centers, we want to compare the shapes, we want to compare the spreads, we want to compare the presence or absence of outliers. Let's take a look at an example here. We see what we call parallel box plots. There are two box plots that are parallel and on the same xaxis. Now, often times we're going to be asked to do is compare. So the top is trees from the west side of the forest and the bottom box is trees from the east side. So what could we say about the shapes? Well, we'd say they're both approximately skewed to the right. We see that the bottom 50% on both graphs is well less spread out than the upper 50% on both graphs. So they're both a little bit skewed to the right. We also identify that neither graph has any outliers. And then we also could look at the medians. The median for the east trees is 20 feet where the median for the west trees is 33. So it clearly has a higher center. We could also look at the middle 50%. The IQR for the top west trees is way more spread out than the IQR or the middle 50% for the east trees. So when we're looking at these different graphs, we want to talk about shape. Maybe it's the same in this case right center. The median is higher for one than the other and spread as well. Being able to compare two distributions really is vital. It comes up almost every single year on the FRQ section of the AP exam. So, make sure you take your time with it. Use comparative language and speak in context. Don't just say, "Oh, the one has a center of 33 and the other has a center of 20." 33 what? Fish, inches, centimeters, seconds. No. Trees from the east are a little bit taller than trees from the west. One has a center of around 33 feet. One has a center of around 20 feet. Use things like that to make sure you speak in context, especially when you're comparing two distributions.
Hey StatStars, welcome to the Unit 1 Part B Summer Review video covering collecting data. Before we get started, I want to mention one quick thing. The AP Statistics Course and Exam Description has recently been updated, so many of the topic numbers and units I've referenced throughout this video may not perfectly match the new curriculum. However, the good news is that the content itself hasn't changed. The concepts, vocabulary, definitions, statistical techniques, and problem-solving skills covered in this video are all still essential for success in AP Statistics. So, if you're looking for a comprehensive review of collecting data, you're in the right place. Everything you need to know is right here. So, sit back, grab your notes, and let's review the key concepts together. And don't forget to check out the ultimate review packet for AP Statistics. Inside, you'll find study guides, guided notes, practice worksheets, review videos, answer keys, and many other resources designed to help you prepare for your unit test throughout the year, and ultimately for success on the AP Stats exam in May. Let's get started. So, Unit 3 is all about collecting data, the good, the bad, the ugly, but mostly the good stuff. Here's a quick glance of all the different topics that are in Unit 3, but it essentially comes down to two big things: planning and conducting a study, and how to set up a good experiment. Those are the big topics that are kind of covered in every little tiny detail in this unit. Now, before you do any kind of data collection, it starts with one thing, asking a question. You need a research question before you can even start collecting data. Research questions can aim to learn about a categorical or quantitative variable for a population, or they can aim to look at the relationship between two variables. Couple of examples are, maybe you read that 62.5% of high school graduates go on to college, and you wonder, "What is that value for your particular state?" Or maybe you're wondering, "Hey, is the average amount of time a freshman spends on homework equal, greater than, or less than the average amount of time that a senior spends on homework?" Or maybe you love flowers, and you simply want to know, "Does a new fertilizer help make your flowers grow bigger, and taller, and more beautiful?" All of these types of questions can be answered through research studies. Now, to begin a research study, the very first thing you have to do is collect some data. But, that data is only going to be good if we trust it and feel that it's truthful. When we begin this process of collecting data, the first thing we have to consider is our population. That is the set of all possible subjects or individuals that we're interested in. For example, are we interested in graduates from New Jersey, or are we interested in high school graduates from California? Are we interested in growing a specific type of flower, or are we just talking about all flowers in general? So, the population really does matter. Now, sometimes, if your population's too big, you can't collect data from the entire population, so you just look at data from a sample, which is a subset taken from that population. For example, a group of seniors selected from New Jersey. Often times, our population is so big that we can't collect data from the entire population, so we collect data from a sample, which is a subset taken from that population. Our goal of a sample is to use the information from that sample to make generalizations to the larger population from which that sample came from. Now, once you have your research question, and you know your population, then you can start to identify how you're going to collect that data. There are essentially two types of studies: an observational study, and an experimental study. An observational study is when no treatments are imposed or given out to the subjects in the sample. They're simply analyzed, and tracked, and followed, and questions can be asked, but you're just observing. Now, this can be actually done in two ways. The first type is called a retrospective observational study. Here, we collect data from a sample of objects or people and we analyze that data. Maybe it's data that we collected in the past and it's data that has already occurred. Are we asking the subjects questions about things that have already happened? The second type of observational study is a prospective study. This is where we select our subjects, we select our sample, and then we track them and ask questions, and we observe them moving on into the future. A retrospective study could be something like selecting a group of freshmen, selecting a group of seniors, and then asking them, "Hey, how many minutes did you spend on homework over the last week?" Whereas a prospective study would be selecting a group of freshmen, selecting a group of seniors, and then saying, "All right, hey, for the next week, I want you to track or maybe we're going to actually fill or follow you to see how many minutes you are spending on homework in the future week coming ahead. Now, regardless of it's a retrospective or prospective observational study, the key idea here is that we are not imposing any treatments. We're not giving the subjects in the sample anything to do. We're simply Well, asking them questions, watching them, analyzing them, and often times we could ask questions through a sample survey, which might be just a verbal going back and forth asking questions, or maybe an actual survey on paper that asks them to fill some questions in. But, a sample survey is just a technique used through an observational observational study to collect data. A sample survey simply aims to collect data from a sample in hopes of learning what might be true for the larger population that that sample came from. Now, the second type of study is an experiment. In an experiment, different types of treatments are given or imposed upon the subjects or the participants to see how they're going to respond to those treatments. Now, in either observational or an experimental study, you could learn the relationship between two variables and how one might impact the other. But, only through an experiment can you actually establish what we call causation, meaning a cause-and-effect relationship. In an observational study, you're just observing, so you can learn some really cool information, some great relationships and associations between your two variables, but you can only establish a cause-and-effect relationship through an experiment where you are giving and imposing treatments onto your participants to see how they're going to respond. But, here's perhaps the most important key concept regardless of the type of study that you choose to do. Generalizations can only be made for a population if the data came from a random sample that is representative of the population that it came from. If it wasn't random and it's not representative, forget it, your data is not going to tell you the truth and not going to allow you to make generalizations to that larger population. Now, what are some of the key tasks that you might be asked to do on the AP exam in May that relate to what we're talking about right now. Well, first, they love to ask questions to make sure that you know the key details and the key differences between an observational study and experiment. Number one is that in an observational study, you just observe and watch. In an experiment, you actually give the subject something to do. And again, focusing on that causation, only with an experiment, not observational study, can you find a cause-and-effect relationship. The second thing that often comes out of this particular part of this unit for the AP exam is just reading a scenario and identifying, "Hey, that's an observational study versus that's an experiment." Hopefully, you have the tools to be able to do that. Now, when it comes to selecting a sample, there are five really good ways to do it that result in random and representative samples. Number one is a census, two a simple random sample, three a stratified random sample, four a cluster random sample, and five a systematic sample. In a census we collect data from the entire population of interest. Sounds awesome, right? Well, yeah, actually it is. But if your population is really, really big, then collecting data from the entire population is really, really, really difficult. But if your sample or excuse me, if your population is really, really small, like maybe you're the manager of a small company that only has 20 employees, then you can easily do a census. But again, they're really difficult when your populations are really big. A simple random sample is a sample collected where every single possible group of size n has the same chance of being selected. So, let's just say that you want to get a sample of 100 objects. Well, then any possible 100 objects from that population has the same chance of being selected. This is really easy to do. All you got to do is number every single individual object or person in your population, use what we call a random number generator, which just generates random numbers, ignore repeats, ignore numbers that nobody has, and then the corresponding people that get picked through those numbers from the random number generator are the ones that you pick for your sample. Stratified random sample first starts off to by dividing your population into groups that we call strata. Now, we create those groups based on some shared attributes that those individuals have. That means individuals within each strata are homogeneous, meaning they all have something in common. Once we have these stratas or these groups divided up, we then do a simple random sample taking some subjects from each and every group we create. So, let's just say we have five stratas and the people within each strata have a lot of shared common attributes. We then visit each group and we take a couple people from each group. How do we do that? Randomly, of course, through simple random sample. So, essentially we're doing five simple random samples in each of the strata to create our overall sample. A cluster random sample also involves breaking our population down into groups, but here we call them cluster. In each clusters will be called heterogeneous. Now, that means in each of the clusters we create, we have a mix of all the different attributes that are coming from our population. So, essentially each cluster is like a mini population because it's heterogeneous. It's got a nice mix. Then we don't do a simple random sample from each of the clusters. No, no, no. We do a simple random sample of the clusters. So, the clusters all get numbered and we select one or two, however many clusters you think is needed to become our entire sample. So, let's just say that we have 10 clusters. Each cluster is like a mini population, meaning it wouldn't matter which one gets picked because it will represent our population. So, maybe we label them one through 10 and then we randomly pick out two of them to become our sample. All individuals within each cluster picked creates my entire sample. Systematic random sampling is a method where we have a random starting point and from that random starting point, we have an interval of which we choose people by. Meaning maybe we have a random line of people and we have a random starting point and we select every 10th person in line or maybe we have a list of all of our individuals from our population. We have a random starting point and we select every 17th person from that list. That is where we have a systematic sample. Now, hearing all of these definitions and explanations of our sampling techniques is awesome, but you know what's truly best is to learn through an example. So, let's talk about these five different techniques with an actual example. So, let's just say a large manufacturer of crayons produces thousands and thousands of crayons every single day. Now, they do so over three shifts. You know, first shift, second shift, day shift, and they produce their crayons using five different machines. Our goal is to get a sample of crayons that we're going to analyze and maybe take a look at things like the weight of them, the length of them, the color of them, the how how you know, how dark or how light they color, all those different attributes that we could collect from crayons. Now, a census here would be literally using every single crayon from a day's production. Now, that's thousands of crayons. Now, the advantage is we're going to get very accurate data to use for our investigation. But, the disadvantages is that's thousands of crayons. That's going to take a very large amount of time to analyze every single one of them. And the other disadvantage is if we have to use the crayons and measure the crayons, then can we sell those crayons? Then all of a sudden we just wasted a bunch of crayons. A simple random sample would start by giving every single crayon a unique number, 00001 through thousands and thousands that there are. Then we'd use a random number generator to randomly pick, let's say, 100 crayons. And every one of those numbers that are picked would correspond to a specific crayon, and that crayon would become our sample. Got to make sure to ignore repeats cuz we can't have the same crayon picked twice, and ignore numbers that no crayon has. Now, this is going to be great. But, remember the key detail here. Any group of 100 has a chance to be picked. Now, the advantage here is it's really, well, simple. We're guaranteed to get 100 truly random crayons, and they should be representative. But, the disadvantage is this. Remember, any sample of 100 can be picked. Maybe we get all 100 blue crayons. Now, all of a sudden that's not representative. Now, a sample like that would be extremely unlikely, but there is simple random sample, it is possible. Or maybe all 100 crayons picked are from the second shift. And if the intention of our study is to compare the crayons made from the three different shifts, then all of a sudden only having crayons from the second shift is not going to help answer our research question. Or another example could be if all 100 crayons are from the fourth machine. And again, if the intention of our research question is to compare the machines, then all of a sudden only having 100 crayons from that fourth machine might not be the best idea. Now, all these weird different samples that you could come up with in your mind might be very, very unlikely, but the most important thing is that they are possible when you do a simple random sample. So, there's a lot of good advantages to a simple random sample because it's so simple, but at the same time if you truly need representation, you might not get it. So, we're seeing that there are advantages and disadvantages to all of these different methods. Now, how do we know which one's best? Well, you have to really take into account two things: your population and your research question. If my research question doesn't care about the machine that the crayon came from or that the shift it was made on or its color, then a simple random sample is going to be great. But if my research question is really focused on the machine or the shifts or the color, well, then a simple random sample might not be the best idea. Now, a stratified random sample would begin by first dividing up the population of crayons into groups that have a shared attribute. Something as simple as all the blue crayons, all the green crayons, all the gray crayons, all the red crayons, all the orange crayons, all the green crayons, you separate by groups. Once you have all of those crayons separated, then what you have to do is visit each of those groups or strata we call them. Then you would conduct a simple random sample by taking a couple crayons from every single group. That's the key detail there. Once you have your groups that are very homogeneous within, you then select some from each. Now, you don't have to take the same number from each. If you have way more blue crayons, then maybe you take more blue crayons. If you have way less white crayons, then go ahead and take less white crayons. But, the most important thing is that you have to take some from each group. And the advantage here is you're going to get a very representative sample because you'll have every color. Now, if your research question has nothing to do with color, but it's all about the quality from the three different shifts, well, then maybe you stratify by shifts. You put all the crayons from the first shift together, second shift together, third shift together, and then you do a simple random sample by taking, let's say, I don't know, 75 crayons from each of those three shifts. Again, that's now going to give you the representation of being able to analyze all three shifts because you know for a fact that your sample contains crayons from all three shifts. Or, again, another example is if you really care about how those five different machines are operating, you stratify based on the machine that the crayons came from, and you'd make sure that you take a sample from each of those groups. So, the huge advantage to stratifying is that, well, you are guaranteed the representation that your research question desires. A disadvantage is you're doing multiple simple random samples, so sometimes it can take quite a long time because you got to go to this group and then label label all the crayons, go to this group, label all the crayons, go to this group, and then you got to take a couple from every single group. Again, you're guaranteed the representation, but it's going to be very time-consuming. A cluster random sample would maybe be used if the crayons are already in boxes. And a best-case scenario would be if every single box contains different colors, crayons from different shifts, crayons from different machines. Then, all of a sudden, every box is like, well, it's all little mini population representing all of the different types of crayons, colors, shapes, machines. You get it. Then what we do is we don't label the individual crayons, we label the individual boxes. So maybe we have 200 boxes of crayons and we label them 001 through 200. We use a simple random generator to just generate a couple numbers for us and maybe we select five numbers and those five boxes and every crayon in those five boxes is used in our sample. But the key idea here is that we have these mini populations, those were our clusters, and we don't take some from each cluster, we just pick a couple of the clusters randomly of course to become our entire sample. Now, a great advantage to a cluster sample is it's much, much faster. You only have to label the boxes, you don't have to label all the individual crayons. Now, the disadvantage to a cluster sample is if you don't have that perfect scenario where every box is a good representation of what your research question is focusing on, then maybe it doesn't work. You get the idea, I hope. For example, maybe the boxes are by color. You got a box of blue, another box of red, another box of blue, a box of all yellows, two boxes of all orange, six boxes of all green, whatever. So if you look at those as your clusters, that's a terrible idea because then if you only pick two boxes, then maybe you get the two blue boxes and all of the sudden you're not representative. So you're going to be very careful about how you set up those clusters because you want the clusters to be again mini populations. That way no matter which one is picked, you're going to get that randomness and that representation. Now, a systematic random sample would be you take all the crayons, maybe you line them up and you had a random starting point and from that random starting point you select every 20th crayon until you have 100 total crayons. You just count one, two, three, four, five, oh, 20, 40, 60, and then every 20th crayon becomes selected for your sample. Now, what are some of the key questions that could be asked of you on the AP exam dealing with these different methods of selecting a sample? Number one is just reading a scenario and identifying it as a simple random sample, a census, stratified cluster, or systematic random sample. That's not too bad as long as you understand them. The second thing they like to focus it on is the advantages and the disadvantages of the different methods. They love to give you scenarios and make sure that you understand not only what scenario it is, but what's an advantage to doing it that way versus what's a disadvantage to doing it that way. Now, remember, I said this already, I'll say it one more time. When you're considering advantages and disadvantages, you have to consider two things: the population of interest and the research question. What is it focusing on and how will that dictate what type of method you want to use and why one might be better than another. Bias occurs when certain responses are systematically favored over others. This is really bad. Why? Well, think about it. If you are aiming to get the truth regardless of what it is, that's your goal, and some responses are systematically favored over others, then that means the data you collect is going to be leaning towards those responses that are favored, meaning that you're not going to get the truth that you want. And that's the problem with bias. Now, there's lots of different ways that you can have bias in your data. Let's examine some of them. Bias can come from how you select your sample or what you do with your sample. Meaning that maybe you have a great random sample, but what you do with it creates bias. Here are some of the different forms of bias: voluntary response bias, convenience bias, undercoverage bias, response bias, and nonresponse bias. Let's talk about these different types of bias through an example. Let's say our population of interest is high school students from the state of California, and our research question is focusing on the habits and opinions of illegal drug use from those students. And we have a sample survey for the students to fill out already to go. What are some things that could go wrong with how we collect a sample of high school students from the state of California? Well, one thing we could do that'd be really, really bad is asking for volunteers to fill out our sample survey about opinions and habits of illegal drug use. I mean, what type of student do you think is going to volunteer to fill out that survey? Probably kids that don't use drugs and have very low opinions of them. So, this is the problem you use volunteers. You're going to get strong opinions from either one side or the other. Then all of a sudden, you're not getting to that truth that you're really after. So, we pretty much always say, "Don't ever use volunteers. It's simply not random." A second thing you could do wrong when it comes to selecting your sample is using a convenience sample. This means anything that you do that's not random in terms of picking your students. So, maybe we just say, "Listen, I don't have a ton of time. I'm just going to drive to the closest high school in California, and I'm going to sample all the kids in that high school and give them my sample survey." Well, first and foremost, that's not random at all. That's a huge problem. And it might not be representative. I mean, maybe the high school that you visit is a very high socioeconomic with a lot of rich wealth in that district, and all of a sudden the opinions you get are not going to be really representative of the entire population. That's going to be a problem. So, don't ever pick a sample out of convenience for you. Imagine you have a great idea to do a cluster random sample, and you have clusters of all of the different high schools across the state of California. You envision that every high school is like a mini population. It's got boys, it's got girls, it's got this, it's got that. It's nice and random and nice and representative, right? Well, the problem here is if you go ahead and say, "Hey, listen, I'm going to number every single high school student of California, and I'm going to pick out five of them, and every student in those five schools will be my sample. What if the five schools that you just end up picking end up being private schools from really wealthy areas? Then all of a sudden the data you use for your research question is going to favor those types of students who might be like, "A-okay, we don't use drugs." And then all of a sudden you have a big, big problem. So, even though your intention was using a really good cluster sample, and you thought your clusters were mini populations, but if those different clusters, the different high schools, are very different from each other, then all of a sudden that's not a great idea. Remember, when you create clusters, you want any cluster being picked to be a great representation of the entire population, and that might not be true if you use the high schools as your mini population. In that scenario, you basically uncovered all other types of high schools if you only got five private high schools. Now, bias can also come from what you do after you have your sample. So, maybe you have the most perfect, random, representative sample from the students in the state of California that's ever, ever been created, all right? A-okay, this is great, this is awesome. But you say, "All right, your teachers are going to ask you the survey questions out loud in front of everybody else, do you use illegal drugs, what's your opinion on using drugs, what type of illegal drugs do you use?" Now, all of a sudden, because the teacher's asking the question, we have what's called response bias, because some students might not give a very truthful response because of the person asking the question. So, response bias is basically your response is untruthful for any reason. Another example of this could be if the wording of the question looks something like this. Now, another form of response bias could come in the way that you actually word your questions. Imagine you have this question. Illegal drug use causes hundreds of deaths every year and tons and tons of arrests. What do you think of illegal drug use? Well, if that's the way you word your question, you're probably going to get a lot of students that say, "Oh, I didn't I just think about all the people that are getting arrested and all the deaths that it's causing. Yeah, I'm against illegal drug use." Now, the problem there is that very first phrasing called leading wording or leading questions, right? The question was worded to lead you to a to a certain answer and that is of course going to cause response bias. So, how do we fix that? Just get rid of that leading words and ask the question straightforward and simply. Again, another example of what can happen after you select your sample is you again have the most perfect representative random sample ever, but 30% of the kids that are selected don't respond. We call this non-response bias. Now, what's the problem when people don't respond? Well, it's because maybe the reason they're not responding makes them very different than those that do respond. Then all of a sudden, you're only getting responses from those that do respond and if they're very different from the ones that don't respond, then you're going to be biased. You had all these people picked to be in your sample, you need to get the survey filled out by all of them. You can't allow some people to just not respond because again, maybe they're different and you want to know about those differences. Now, the big question is how do you fix these mistakes? Well, if the mistake happened in how you selected your sample, be smart, don't be dumb, be intelligent, plan correctly, think about your population, think about your research questions, and make sure you come up with a sampling technique that is going to truly produce a random and representative sample. Now, what about mistakes that happen after you have your sample? Well, in terms of response bias, make sure you do things like proofread and field test your questions to make sure they're going to give you good accurate results. Make sure that you have the option to have the survey be anonymous so kids are more likely to fill it out truthfully. And if people don't respond, you need to get their opinions and you need to get them to fill that survey. Maybe you call them, maybe you visit them, maybe you email them, maybe you bug them over and over again, or you can even incentivize them to fill out the survey. As long as that incentive doesn't, again, lead them to slighting certain opinions, it's fine. But you have to get their opinions. You can't just fix nonresponse bias by asking more people to fill in the gap. Not how it's going to work. Now, what are some of the key details here, the key things that the AP test can ask you about bias? Well, one, again, maybe multiple choice question, you have to read a couple scenarios and choose what type of bias are you seeing, whether it's response bias, nonresponse bias, undercoverage, all that kind of fun stuff. Hopefully, that's not too bad. The other thing they like to really focus in on is how do you fix the problem? So, maybe they'll give you a scenario where there's clearly an issue and they say, "Hey, how could you fix the issue? What can be done to make it better?" So, again, make sure you think about those things as well. Now, when it comes to experimental design, there are tons of vocabulary words that you need to know. And not only do you need to know them, but you need to understand them and be able to put them into use in a specific problem. So, here's a look at many of those vocab words. Let's actually take a look at an example to try to fully understand all of them. Researchers have a new medication to help memory in patients with Alzheimer's. Here's what they're going to do. They're going to get 100 patients with Alzheimer's, all different severities of it, to volunteer. Some are male, some are female, some are a little younger, some a little bit older. You get the idea. It's a nice mix of 100 patients with Alzheimer's. 50 of them are going to be given a new medication randomly and the other 50 are going to be given a placebo. Now, after 6 months of taking the medication that they were given, they're going to do a memory test again and the results showed a statistically significant improvement in those that took the new medication. Now, what does all this mean and what are all the key details that we could talk about with this example? First, this example may sound short and simple, but it really does contain all four of the most important principles that it comes to an experiment. All four of these principles have to be in your experiment if it's going to be deemed, well, good. We need to have comparison. We need to have random assignment of the treatments. We must have direct control to prevent confounding variables and we also need to have replication. The first vocab word here is experimental units. These are the subjects or individuals or people that are going to actually receive the treatments. For us, that is the 100 patients with Alzheimer's. The explanatory variable is the variable that we're going to manipulate. It's the It's the treatments, right? It's the variable that comes in different treatments. For us, that is the medication coming in two different treatments. That would be the new medication and the placebo. Now, why do we need the placebo? Well, a placebo is essentially a fake pill that does nothing. Why do we need that? Because of what's called the placebo effect. The placebo effect is this simple idea that when you're working with humans, it's human nature that when you are told you're getting something, that that simple knowledge of being told you're getting something might elicit a response. And the moment I know that I'm not getting anything, I'm all upset. I'm all sad. I didn't get anything and that can change my response as well. So, the only that we can control for the possible effect is through the use of a placebo. Basically, ensuring that everybody in our study goes home with something to take. That way, everybody experiences the placebo effect. Everybody thinks that they're taking something that's going to help them. Now, the idea here is that you can't get rid of the placebo effect. That's a something a lot of people think. They think, "Oh, I'm going to use a placebo to get rid of the placebo effect." No, it's actually opposite. You use a placebo to make sure that everybody has the placebo effect. Everybody thinks they're getting something. Everybody's excited to be a part of the experiment, and nobody goes home all upset and sad that they didn't get anything, and maybe that upset and sadness actually ruins their memory. Hopefully, you get the idea. So, you don't really need a placebo when you're working with objects or animals. When you're working with human beings, if you can use a placebo, please do so. The response variable is what you're going to measure at the end of your experiment. In our case, that is the difference in their memory tests on this um exam, whatever they're doing. So, we have the test results from before they took the medication, and the test results after, and we're hoping to see a difference. But, regardless, the response variable is what you're going to measure at the end. Now, let's talk about those four main principles. First, comparison. We definitely had comparison here because we had two different groups. One that took the new medication, and one that took a placebo. If everybody got the new medication, then we'd have nothing to compare results to to even know if taking the new medication was better because you can't say it's better if you don't have something to compare to. So, every experiment has to have at the very least two different treatment groups. Now, you could call the group that's taking the placebo, we call it a control group. A control group, by definition, is a group that gets nothing to use to compare to. You don't necessarily have to have a control group. Let's just say we were comparing our new medication to an old medication. Then, in that situation, we wouldn't necessarily need a group that gets the placebo because everybody's already taking something. But, if one group is literally getting nothing used to kind of compare your data to, that's going to be a control group. Now, the second principle we have here is random assignment of the treatments. What subjects get what treatment has got to be random. So, 100 people all get a number 001 through 100, use a random number generator, ignore repeats, ignore numbers that nobody has, and the first 50 numbers selected will correspond to those 50 patients who will receive the new medication, and the remaining 50 people will receive the placebo. Now, what is the true meaning of random assignment? Well, first off, it just sounds good to do it random, right? But, really more importantly, the real deep reason why we do random assignment is to evenly disperse all potential confounding variables that we just can't control for. Now, I mentioned things like gender, age, and severity of Alzheimer's amongst our patients. We would only hope that random assignment would sprinkle some of those different attributes into both groups. So, the idea through random assignment is that at the end we have these two groups that are very, very, very similar, right? This group is a nice mix of males, females, younger, older, severity high, mild severity of Alzheimer's, and guess what? Same with this group. So, through random assignment, we're crossing our fingers, and because it's random, right? We're going to get these two nice groups that are very, very, very similar between. The difference is what we give them. This group gets the placebo, this group gets the new medication. That's the idea. Random assignment helps us to actually control for confounding variables we cannot control for. The third pillar is control, direct control, for other potential confounding variables. Now, if there are confounding variables that you can control for, please do so. Remember, random assignment is to help for the ones that we actually can't control for. So, let's just say that everybody is going to take it for 6 months. That's a form of direct control. If one group took it for a year and one group took it for 6 months, then we have a huge confounding variable. Was it the time that related to this that caused patients to have better or worse memory, or was it the medication? And maybe something as simple as making sure that everybody takes it with a glass of water in the morning, because if you take it with milk in the afternoon, maybe that's why you have a better memory. It's the milk and taking it in the afternoon has nothing to do with the actual medication. I mean, just who knows? So, you got to control for the things that you can control for. That's something that's really important in every experiment. Everything else you can't control for, hey, you just leave up to random assignment. Now, the fourth and final pillar, or major principle, is replication. Replication is the idea that you want as many people in your study as possible. If we only had one person versus one person, new medication and old medication, or excuse me, new medication and placebo, well, then well, I mean, there's a million reasons why this person could have a better memory after 6 months than this person. That's not going to really help us determine if we have good valid results. But, if we have 50 people all taking the new medication and 50 people taking the placebo, and after 6 months the average memory increase of these people is significantly higher than these people, well, I think we're on to something. Now, you know what would be even better? Is if we had a thousand people taking the new medication and a thousand people taking the placebo. That would be even more replication. But, replication is the idea that having more and more subjects and experimental units within your study, within your experiment, is going to make it better and give you stronger, more valid results at the end. Some other terms that you may see here are what we call blinding. We have two different levels of blinding. We have single blinding. That is where the subjects involved in the experiment do not know what they're getting, which in our experiment we do have that. We do have the use of the placebo to make sure that everybody thinks they're taking something. The pills are all the same size, they're all the same color, that way there's no difference between them and nobody knows any better. Now, in some experiments, well, you really can't blind subjects. Maybe the treatments are things that you know the difference between and it is what it is, but if you can blind, certainly try to. Now, double blinding is when the research team that actually is involved in maybe giving the treatments or measuring the response variable at the end, they don't know what the subjects are getting either. That's something you should always think about doing as well. So, single blinding is when one group, the subjects or the research members are blinded, they don't know what's getting. Double blind is when both of those groups don't know what the subjects are getting. All this is just to prevent any type of bias from sinking into your experiment and ruining your results. Now, there are also three different ways to design your experiment. Basically, how do you want to set it up? The first is a completely randomized design, the second is a randomized block design, and the third is a matched pair design. The description I've already given you for our Alzheimer's patients example is a completely randomized design. We had 100 subjects and what 50 of them got and what the other 50 got was, well, completely random. In a completely randomized design, the goal is really, really simple. To allow randomness to create two or more very, very similar groups. You want these two groups to be very similar between, that way the only difference is what you give them. New medication, placebo. A randomized block design is used when you think there is a second, third, or maybe even fourth variable that you think could become confounding. So, for example, if I wanted to set our Alzheimer's patients example up as a block design, I would have to consider what other variables might matter in terms of increasing or decreasing memory. Now, one thing could be gender. Maybe gender, maybe maybe females just tend to have better memories as it is and males don't, who knows? The other thing that can definitely come into play is the severity of the Alzheimer's. If you are really severe, then you probably have a lot of really bad memory as it is. Or if it's very mild, maybe your memory isn't too bad yet. So, the idea here is that we might want to create blocks. So, a block would be a group of subjects that all have some shared common attributes, like all women with severe Alzheimer's. Another block could be all women with mild Alzheimer's. A third block could be all women, or excuse me, all men with severe Alzheimer's. And a fourth block could be all men with mild Alzheimer's. This way we're allowing that variable to be brought to the forefront and really pay attention to. Then, within each of those blocks, both treatments are given out randomly. So, in the women with severe Alzheimer's, half of them get the placebo, half of them get the new medication randomly. Same thing with the other blocks. So, in each block, both treatments are given out randomly. So, at the end of the day, we still got 50 people taking the new medication, we still got 50 people taking the placebo, but now we've blocked to really focus in, does gender matter? Does severity of Alzheimer's matter? If we just leave it up to completely random, then, you know, small chance of this happening, but maybe all the women get the new medication used medication and all the men get the placebo, then we have a huge confounding variable. Or maybe all the severe patients go into the new group and all the mild patients go into the placebo group. That creates a very large confounding variable of well, their memory got better because they were mild or their memory got worse cuz they were severe and we don't want that to happen. Again, you only have to worry about this if you're really concerned about another variable that could matter towards your response. Now, the third and final type of designs will be called a matched pair design. Here, we pair subjects up together. So, first, to perform a matched pair design, you have to have two treatments only. You can't do it with three, four, five treatments. So, if you got more treatments, then this design is just out of the question. But, the idea is you pair two people together because they have a lot a lot of shared attributes. So, maybe two females that are both in their 60s, both with severe Alzheimer's, two males, both in their 80s, both with severe Alzheimer's, and two men, both maybe younger with mild severity of Alzheimer's. Then, within each pair, randomly, of course, one gets the new medication, one gets the placebo. How you going to determine which gets which? Again, randomly. It's got to be random, right? Now, you have many, many, many pairs. So, with 100 subjects, we pair and make 50 pairs. And at the end, hey, guess what? We still got 50 people taking the new medication. We still got 50 people taking the placebo. But, the idea is that the data is paired together so we can really hone in on these two individuals are extremely, extremely similar. The only difference is one got the new medication one got the placebo. And then, we can really start to analyze, "Hey, everybody getting the new medication got better. It really does work regardless of gender, regardless of age, regardless of severity of Alzheimer's." You can also match people up with themselves. Might not really work in this example, but imagine that you're doing something with suntan lotion and you could pair me up with me. One arm gets the new suntan lotion, one arm gets an old suntan lotion or some type of placebo, and then I can really compare them as well. So, people can even be paired up with themselves. Twins also make great pairs because they're even the same down to the genetic level if that really matters for your research question. So, those are the three different types of designs that you could use. All of them are great, and again, it's specific in terms of what your population is and what your research question is. What are some of the key things that can be asked of you on the AP exam when it comes to experimental design? Well, one is that typically one of the six FRQs is always about some type of experiment. Again, not always, but very common. And things they can ask are, "Hey, you know, what's the exploratory variable? What are the different treatments? What's the response variable? Who are the experimental units?" All those kind of basic questions. They could ask you to design a study or recognize what type of design is being utilized. They can even give you a matched pair design that's not designed properly and ask how maybe you would fix it to make it better. And they also love to focus on why it would be important to do a block study. Again, a block experimental study is designed when you have another variable that you know is going to impact your response and you don't want it to. They love to ask you questions, so you can make sure you focus on those things, whether it be multiple choice where you're choosing which design is best. You know, there might even be a multiple-choice question focusing on a matched pair design, and one design says, "Hey, you're going to pair up two people up because they're very, very different." Another one says you're going to pair people together because they're very, very similar, but they both get the same treatment. Things like that are all bad. Remember that in matched pair design, we want to pair people together because they're extremely similar, but one of them randomly gets one treatment and one gets the other treatment. So, questions like that are very, very common. The last major topic in this unit is over statistical inference in experiments. Statistical inference is a huge word that we're going to use a ton throughout the entire course. But the idea of inference is very simple. Inference is the idea of using data from a sample usually we call data from a sample statistics and trying to use those data, use those statistics to make judgments about the larger population from which it came from. In a simple sentence, that's what inference is all about. Using data from a sample to make judgments about what could be true for a larger population from which that data came from. Now, the big rule here is that if you want to be able to use data from a sample to make a judgment about a larger population which it came from, that data must be selected randomly. As long as that data was selected randomly and it's representative of that population, then you can certainly use that data to make generalizations to the larger population from which it came from. Another big vocabulary word here is statistically significant results. We see it, we hear it all the time. After a research study was done, we found that there was statistically significant evidence that X impacts Y or X causes Y. What does statistically significant evidence mean? Here's the idea. When you are done with an experiment, right? You are going to have two or more sets of data. And guess what? I guarantee you that those two or more sets of data are going to be different. Why? Because they came from different samples or different groups. They're guaranteed to be different. The question is, why are they different? If they're only a little bit different, then maybe it was just because of chance. So, maybe we have a group of freshmen and we take measure how long it takes them to do their homework every week. We have a group of seniors and we measure how long it takes them to do their homework every week. And and the difference is very small. In fact, it's so small that it, you know what? It was just by pure chance. If we did the research again with a different group of freshmen, a different group of seniors, then maybe the seniors spend more time or maybe the freshmen may spend more time. And it's just such a small difference that it's just by pure chance and it doesn't really mean anything. Freshmen don't spend more, seniors don't spend less. But imagine if the difference is really, really big. So big that it could not have occurred by chance. Well, then in that situation, we have what we call statistically significant results. Meaning that the difference was so big it could not have occurred by chance. So, if we got our freshmen, we got our seniors, and the difference between them was really, really big in terms of how much they spend on homework, well, then we could maybe possibly conclude that seniors spend less time on homework or freshmen spend more time. Because if we were to repeat that over and over and over and over again, freshmen, seniors, freshmen, seniors, in every single situation and every single sample, we would get the freshmen being more and the seniors being less. That would result in statistically significant evidence. Even at the end of an experiment, we have our Alzheimer's patients with the new medication, we have our Alzheimer's patients with the placebo. If the difference in their memory scores is significant, statistically significant, then that tells us that the difference could not have occurred by chance. Which, guess what? Means the medication worked. That would be our conclusion. So, when you claim that you have statistically significant results, you're saying that the differences that you're seeing between your sets of data are too big that they could not have occurred by chance. Now, when we have statistically significant results, well, then that could lead us, if everything is done correctly, to say that one variable caused another variable to change. So, if everything about my Alzheimer's patients experiment was perfect and I have statistically valid results, then what I could say is that, "Hey, I have data that supports the fact that the new medication will cause an increase in memory for patients with Alzheimer's like the ones that I used." But, something really important here to note is if you go back and listen to everything I've been saying, I said that the 100 patients in that Alzheimer's experiment were volunteers. And you may say, "Oh, wait a minute, you told us earlier that volunteers are really bad." Yes, if you're doing a sample survey and you're collecting a sample using volunteers is terrible. But, oftentimes in an experiment, you sometimes have to use volunteers because you can't force people to take a medication. So, you get volunteers who are willing to do it. All that means is that who I can generalize results my results to is kind of limited. Meaning that I can only say that this new medication will work for people that are similar to those that were in my experiment. Similar to those that volunteered. I can't say that it's going to work for everybody out there that has Alzheimer's because I used volunteers. If I wanted to be able to generalize my results to all people that have Alzheimer's, then I would need to make sure that I choose the 100 subjects randomly, forcing them to take the medication, which could be a little bit unethical. But, those are just some of the drawbacks when you're working with experiments. That's what this section is all about. The idea of what has to happen for you to infer your results to the larger population. Got to be a random sample for sure. And if it's an experiment, you have to have that random assignment. Maybe you use volunteers and that's okay for the most part. But, it just limits who you can apply your results to. You can only say it's true for people similar to the volunteers that you have. Statistically significant results means that any observed differences in our sets of data could not have occurred by chance. And that they are too large to just be because of pure happenstance. They must have occurred for some reason, and that would lead us to conclude in an experiment that one variable caused a change in the other variable. Now, what does statistically significant mean? Well, it means exactly that, that the results were too big to have occurred by chance. Random assignment in experiment is the only way that we can be led to statistically significant results. Who gets what has to be selected randomly, or else you'll never get statistically significant results. What are the key questions that could be asked of you on the AP test here? Well, honestly, a lot of it hinders upon who or what you can generalize your results to. That's why you really got to focus on the key concepts. If you're just doing some type of observational study where you're collecting data to learn about a larger population, the data you collect has to be random in order to generalize those results, but you can only generalize those results to specific population from which your data was taken from. Now, if you want to be able to claim that one thing causes another through an experiment, and you want those results to be statistically significant, then you have to have that random assignment in your experiment. In terms of who gets what treatment has to be done randomly. Now, one thing that typically happens in an experiment is you have to use volunteers because you can't forcibly make randomly selected people do something if they don't well want to do it. So, typically, experiments do use volunteers, and that's still okay. The only drawback there is that we can only apply our results to people similar to the volunteers in our study. We can't apply results to all people from that entire population, unless the people in your experiment were randomly selected first and then randomly assigned their treatments, which, I'll be honest, is kind of rare because it's hard to force people to do something if they don't want to. Well, that's it for unit three over collecting data. It's a great unit, a really simple unit with very little math. A lot of kids love it, a lot of kids do well on it, and it's not overly large, but you got to make sure that you understand those two huge ideas of designing and planning a study and experimental design. Lots of key details in all of that, but it's overall not too bad. It is a lot of writing sometimes cuz you got to explain yourself, but honestly, it's nice and simple. After you're done watching this video, please make sure you fill out that unit three study guide. You can get access to that study guide through the link in the description below, and you can do it through the ultimate review packet, which is filled with tons of awesome things that are going to really help you, including, guess what, the answer key to that study guide so you can check your work and make sure that you fully understand all the key concepts from unit three. Best of luck, and see you guys in the next video.

Unit 2 review
Hey statsars, welcome to the unit two part A summary review video covering analyzing two categorical variables and probability. Before we get started, I want to mention one quick thing. The AP Statistics course and description has recently been updated. So, some of the topic numbers and units I reference throughout this video may not perfectly match the new curriculum. However, the good news is that the content itself hasn't changed. The concepts, vocabulary, definitions, statistical techniques, and problem-solving skills covered in this video are all still essential for success in AP Statistics. So, if you're looking for a comprehensive review of analyzing two categorical variables and basic probability, you're in the right place. Everything you need to know is right here. So, sit back, grab your notes, and let's review the key concepts together. And don't forget to check out the ultimate review packet for AP Statistics. Inside, you'll find study guides, guided notes, practice worksheets, review videos, answer keys, and many other resources designed to help you prepare for your unit test throughout the year and ultimately for success on the AP Statistics exam in May. So, let's get started. First, let's start with analyzing one set of data where we collect two categorical variables from that set of data. The best way to organize and understand our data is with what's called a two-way table. Let's take a look at one now. Here's a two-way table where we looked at a sample of students and we asked them two questions. First, how did you get to school? What was your mode of transportation? And second, were you tardy at least once in the last week? From a table like this, we could calculate some sample statistics. Now, why are they called sample statistics? Well, because they come from a sample. Remember, statistics is the word that we use for any information that is taken from a sample. We have several different types of statistics that we can gather from one of these two-way tables for a categorical variable. First what we have are what are called marginal relative frequencies. Here, we're looking at the values that are in the totals. That's why that's called marginal because the totals are in the margins of the table. We could either look at the proportion of all the kids that were tardy at least once that week, or the proportion of kids that were not tardy at least once that week. We could also look at the margins for the different types of transportation, like the proportion of kids that rode the bus, the proportion of kids that walked to school, the proportion of kids that drive themselves to school, or the proportion of kids that get a ride from their parent to school. But again, we calculate these values from the totals by dividing it by the grand total, hence the marginal relative distributions. Next up, we have what's called joint relative frequencies. When we say the word joint, we basically mean the word and. So, we're combining any two of the categories together. For example, we could look at the proportion of kids that were tardy and rode the bus. Or we could look at the proportion of kids that walked to school and drive themselves to school. For a joint relative frequency, we're looking at a specific value that matches for those two variables in the table, and again dividing by the grand total. Lastly, we have conditional relative frequencies. These are a little bit more confusing, but once you get the hang of it, it's really simple. The idea is there's a condition attached, and when there's a condition attached, it changes the value in the denominator. For example, you'll see given a student is tardy, what proportion of them ride the bus to school? So, the condition is that it's given that they were tardy. That means our denominator is only limited to looking at the kids that were tardy because it was given, right? There was a condition attached. We know that the student that we're talking about was tardy to school. So, our denominator becomes much, much smaller because we're only looking at those students that were tardy, and of those tardy students, how many of them rode the bus to school? So, we take how many rode the bus to school and were tardy, and we divide it by the total that were tardy to get our conditional relative frequency. Another example we see here is given that they walked to school, what proportion of them tardy? This time the condition, what is given is that they walk to school. Once again, that limits our denominator to only looking at kids that walk to school, cuz that's the condition, that's what we know. The numerator is both walking to school and tardy. So, take that value divided by the total of kids that walk to school, and you'll have your conditional relative frequency. Hopefully, that makes a lot of sense. For all three of those statistics that we looked at, marginal, joint, and conditional, notice that we looked at the relative frequencies. We didn't look at just the counts or how many. Why is that? Because when you have unequal sample sizes, or again, a different amount of kids that walk to school, different amount of kids that take the bus to school, different amount of kids that are tardy, different amount of kids that are not tardy, it makes more sense to compare proportions or percentages, or what's relative to the whole. If we just look at counts, it's not really fair because some, you know, more kids might take the bus to school, less kids might walk to school. So, just looking at counts isn't really a fair comparison. But, if we're going to compare probabilities and proportions within these tables, it makes a way more sense to look at relative frequencies, which are proportion-based. Two-way tables can also be turned into some pretty sweet graphs called segmented bar graphs. Here, we see a segmented bar graph where we've broken down the bars by mode of transportation. And then, within each mode of transportation, we're separating the proportion of kids that were tardy and the proportion of kids that were not tardy in that mode. So, basically, we're looking at conditional relative frequencies here, because the first bar is only for those kids that ride the bus, and of those kids, what proportion are tardy, what proportion are not. So, we can see the breakdown for each mode of transportation. We can also switch that around, and now have each bar representing the proportion of kids that are tardy and the kids that are not tardy. So, the first bar we see here is all the kids that were tardy, and then the breakdown of what proportion of them ride the bus, what proportion of them walk to school, what proportion of them drive to school, and what proportion of them get a ride from their parent. And then we also see the same thing in the bar that's marked the total kids that were not tardy. Again, each segment is the proportion of the different modes of transportation. So we could switch it up and it's all provided the same amount of information. It's really just a matter of what the condition is. Is the condition the mode of transportation, or is the condition being tardy or not? That would determine how you create the segmented bar graph. But segmented bar graphs show the proportions within each of those conditions. They make for great ways to display the data and really understand what's going on within the data. Now, the really important thing we want to do here is determine if there is any type of an association or relationship between these variables of mode of transportation and being tardy or not. Now, to do this we really have to take a look at the marginal relative frequencies versus the conditional relative frequencies. Now, please note when we say that there is an association between two variables, we mean that they are not independent. An association means that one variable has something to do with the other variable and vice versa. If two variables are independent, they actually have no association whatsoever, which means one variable does not impact the other. Let's dive into this example to talk about if there is an association or not. Here's how we can actually explore the relationship between these two quantitative variables. So first we want to take a look at the marginal relative frequency. For example, what proportion were tardy at least once? So here we see the marginal again, 65 out of 188 kids, or about 34.6% of all the students surveyed were tardy at least once. Then we want to do is we want to compare to that the conditional relative frequencies. So meaning if we only look at the kids that rode the bus. So of the 35 kids that rode their bus, 12 were tardy. That's about 34% of the 29 kids that went for their parents to school, 10 were tardy, it's about 34% as well. Of the kids that drove themselves to school, it's about 31 out of 90, again, also about 34% and then finally of the 34 kids that walked to school, we saw about 12 that were tardy or about 35%. So, what we're noticing is that you know, we start off with that marginal, about 34% of kids are tardy to school at least once during the week, but notice that if you ride the bus, about 34% tardy, if you drive to school with the parent, about 34% tardy, if you drive yourself to school, about 34% tardy, and if you walk to school, pretty darn close to about 34% are tardy. This is a sign of no association because what we're showing here is that again, start off with that marginal, 34% of kids are tardy. However, if you arrive to school by bus, it didn't go up, it didn't go down, it stayed about 34%. If you drove with the parent, it didn't go up, it didn't go down, it stayed about 34%. If you drove yourself, it did not go up, it did not go down, it stayed at about 34%. Yeah, walking I know is a teeny bit more, it's about 35.3%, but again, it's really, really close to 34%. So, what we're seeing is that the added conditions of how you got to school did not make it any more or less likely for you to be tardy. It's all around 34-ish percent. This is an a sign of an association. When you attach a condition to a question and it doesn't change the marginal relative frequency, well then there's no association. Clearly, how you arrive to school does not make you any more likely or less likely to be tardy. Now, that's in stark contrast to looking at this example. So, here I'm using the same concept, the same idea, being tardy yes or no, and how you got to school, but I changed the numbers a little bit. But first I want you to notice that the grand totals are all the same. It's the numbers within the table that I made different. Now, in this example, we're going to see that there is a clear association. For example, once again, we start off with the marginal relative frequency, where we see about 65 out of 188 kids were tardy to school, again, about that 34%. But this time, when we look at the kids that rode the bus, of the 35 kids that rode the bus, only four were tardy. Wow, it dropped to 11%. So again, something about riding the bus made you less likely, or there's less of a chance that you are tardy. If you drove with a parent, five out of those 29 kids were tardy, about 17%, also a little bit less than that marginal value. And if you drove yourself, of the 90 kids that drove themselves, 48 were tardy. That is now up to 53%. So we see that if you drive yourself to school, you are much more likely to be tardy. And then lastly, of the kids that walked to school, eight were tardy, and that's at about 24%. So here we're seeing very different numbers. The marginal relative frequency, that 34% number, is not matching up with the conditionals. That is a sign of an association, because this is showing that when you add that added condition of, hey, I I drive, you know, I go on the bus to get to school, it made me less likely to be tardy. And if I drive myself to school, it made me much more likely to be tardy. This is where we see that there is an association, because those conditions changed the probabilities, or changed the proportions. We can also see this concept of an association or not in the segmented bar graphs. Here's the second segmented bar graphs for our data that showed no association. Notice, no matter how you get to school, bus, parent, self, or walk, about 34%, that's the bluish, that are tardy and about 66%, that's the purple that are not tardy. Again, showing that it doesn't change. Driving the bus, going with your parents, driving yourself, doesn't change those proportions, which means no association. Well, here is the segmented bar graphs for the example where there is association. We see that when you drive yourself to school, there is a change and a noticeable change in the proportion of kids that are tardy versus proportion of kids that are not tardy. So, we don't see the exact same numbers across the board. When you see the exact same numbers across the board, 34, 34, 34, 34%, that's the sign of no association. When you see a change of those conditional relative frequencies, that's a sign that there is an association. So, make sure you know how to establish these these concepts by looking at the segmented bar graphs or by looking at the two-way tables and then writing up a nice explanation of that. Now, from this section over analyzing two categorical variables measured from one set of data, what are some big things are going to come up on your exam or on the AP exam? Well, the major things we're looking at are just calculating some of those different statistics that I mentioned. Can you calculate marginal distributions, joint distributions, or conditional distributions? Just being able to find those values in a two-way table is really, really simple and really, really easy to do, but it's definitely going to be asked of you. The second thing you're going to have to be able to do is answer that question, is there an association from looking at either a two-way table or looking at a segmented bar graph? That's a big concept, a big idea that's definitely going to come up on the AP exam for sure. Understanding probability begins with understanding what a random process is. A random process generates results that are random or simply unknown and determined by chance. Seeing patterns through collection of data through a random process doesn't necessarily mean that the variation we see is not random. Random just means unknown and uncertain. An outcome is the result of a random process, and an event is a collection of outcomes. Now, when we say that an outcome is random, all we're saying is that we don't yet know what that outcome will be. For example, if the random process is rolling a fair six-sided die, and we say that an outcome is random, all that means is we don't yet know what that outcome will be until we roll the die. Probability is simply trying to quantify the uncertainty in a random process. One viewpoint of the probability of an outcome is the long-run relative frequency of that outcome occurring. Meaning, after a large number of repetitions of that random process, we could take the number of times we observe the outcome occur, divided by the total number of repetitions ran. We can find these long-run relative frequencies, also known as probabilities, through simulation. Take rolling a die. If we want to find the probability of rolling a two, we could start tossing a die repeatedly. And after a large number of tosses, we could count the number of times we observed a two, and divided by the total number of times we tossed the die in total. But, what is the long run? If we only rolled the die 20 times and counted the total number of times we observed a two divided by 20, we wouldn't get a very accurate probability. This is where the law of large numbers comes in. The law of large numbers states that simulated probabilities tend to get closer to the true probability the more trials we perform. Basically, if we want to be more accurate, we need to run more trials. But, how many is many? Well, a lot, infinite. That is why the long-run relative frequency definition of probability will never be perfect, because we can never run infinite simulations or infinite trials. So, just know that the more trials we run, the more accurate we will be to what the true probability could be. Now, rolling a die is a really simple random process to repeat over and over, where other random processes are not so easy to actually simulate. For example, let's just say the manager of a fast food restaurant knows that through past observations, 65% of customers who ask for a free cup for water take that free cup to the soda fountain and fill with something other than water. I know, a crime. Now, maybe he wants to find the probability that of the next 10 customers who ask for a free cup of water, four or less of them fill with something other than water. Now, how would he actually simulate this random process? He would have to look at 10 customers, record how many actually filled their water cup up with something other than water, and then redo redo it again, and do it again, and do it again, and then he's going to count how many of those trials resulted in four or less people filling their free water cup up with something other than water, but that's really not feasible for the manager to actually do a large number of times. So, what could he do? Well, he could actually run a simulation using numbers. Running a simulation with numbers is where we pretend that numbers through a random number table are customers, and some numbers are going to designate that those customers are going to fill their water cup up with something other than water, while other numbers would represent that those customers are filling their water cup up with, well, water. Then we could look at 10 customers and record how many of them fill up their water cup with something other than water, look at another 10 customers, another 10 customers, another 10 customers, and because we're using numbers through a random number table or a random number generator instead of actually looking at customers, we could do this really quickly and really fast, and actually generate some good probabilities. Then after many many repetitions of looking at these 10 numbers, we could then count how many of our trials had four or less people fill their water cup up with something in the water, divide by a total number of trials, and we could get an estimated probability. But again, we would need to run a large number of trials to get close to the true probability of this event. Simulations can be very useful to try to find, or at least begin to find what the true probability of an event is, but through some basic rules that I could teach you, we could calculate probabilities, true probabilities, really easily and really quickly. All we have to do is think. To find the true probability of an event without a simulation, we need to first understand a couple basic ideas and some ground rules when it comes to probability. The sample space of a chance process is a list of all non-overlapping outcome outcomes. For example, the sample space for the random process of rolling a fair six-sided die would be 1 2 3 4 5 6. And we typically label observable events with letters. For example, A equals we see a five on the next roll, or B equals we see a two on the next roll, or C equals we see an even number on the next roll. Now, finding the probability of event A, seeing a five on the next roll, is actually quite easy. All we got to do is take the total number of outcomes that are in favor of event A in the numerator, divided by in the denominator the total number of outcomes in the sample space. And for this situation, that'd be one outcome that's in favor of rolling a five, divided by six total outcomes in the sample space, for a probability of 1/6. But you already knew that. The probability of an event is always between zero and one, inclusive, meaning it could be zero or could be one or any number in between. Now, the complement of an event is that the event does not happen. And to find the probability of the complement, all you have to do is do one minus the probability that the event will happen. Makes it really simple. So, if the probability that event A occurring is 50%, then you should automatically know very quick without doing a lot of math that the probability that event A does not happen is 85%. Next, we have the probability of event A and event B occurring. This is looking for the probability that both events A and B occur at the same time, and we can express this probability in two ways. This is also known as joint probability. Now, if the two events cannot happen at the same time, then we call them disjoint or mutually exclusive. And if two events are in fact mutually exclusive, then we automatically know that the probability of A and B is a big, beautiful zero. Next, we have the probability of the event A occurring or the probability of event B occurring, and we can express this using two different ways as well. This is known as the union of event A and event B. Now, when we're asked to find the probability of A or B, what we're really looking for is the probability that event A only happens, or the probability of event B only happens, or the probability that both A and B happen. Now, the complement of the probability of A or B is the probability that neither event happens. So, if you think about two events A or B, there's four things that can happen. A only happens, B only happens, A and B happens, or neither happen. And when we talk about the probability of the union or A or B happening, then we're looking at three of those things. A happens, B happens, or both. That's why the opposite is neither. Now, find the probability of event A and B occurring, or the probability of event A or B occurring, often times drives students bonkers. Well, I can make it as easy as I possibly can, but first we have to talk about conditional probability. Conditional probability is when you are asked to find the probability of event A occurring given or on the condition that event B has already or will occur. Now, we express conditional probability like this. Before the line is what we're trying to find the probability of and after the line is the event or the thing that we already know that has occurred or has been given to occur. And we have a really simple formula probability of A on the condition of B. All we got to do is take the probability of A and B divided by the probability of B, the condition. So, regardless of what letters we use, just know that the probability for conditional probability or the formula for conditional probability is to take the probability of both events happening at the same time in the numerator divided by the probability of the condition in the denominator. Okay, now we've gone through enough concepts of basic probability that we can talk about a couple really big probability rules. The first major rule is called the addition rule and it helps us find the probability of A or B. Here's how the formula for it works. To find the probability of A or B, we take the probability of A plus the probability of B and we subtract the probability of A and B. In simple terms, the word or means to add when it comes to probability. But you have to consider that if the two events have some overlap, meaning they're not mutually exclusive, you have to subtract away the overlap, which is the probability of A and B. Now, for some this could be hard to follow. Recall the probability of A or B is the probability of only A, only B, as well as the probability of A and B. So, if the two outcomes A and B have some overlap, again, not mutually exclusive, that means inside of the probability of A is some overlap with the probability of B, and inside of the probability of B is some overlap with the probability of A. Now, we want this overlap to count, but we don't want the overlap to count twice. Seeing this through a Venn diagram makes it really easy to understand. If the events are mutually exclusive, there is no overlap. That is to say the probability of A and B equals zero. So, we see two non-interlinking circles, so the probability of A or B makes complete sense. It's simply the probability of A plus the probability of B. If the events are not mutually exclusive, there is overlap. If we were to simply add the probability of A plus the probability of B, then the overlap that is in both gets counted twice. That is why in the addition rule, we subtract the probability of A and B away. We subtract the overlap, not to get rid of it, but to stop it from being double-counted. So, when we subtract, we get the probability of only A, only B, and A and B. The second huge [snorts] big rule is called the multiplication rule. The multiplication rule states to find the probability of A and B, you take the probability of A times the probability of B given that A has already occurred. In simple terms, the word and in probability means to multiply, but you must always consider how the second event is impacted by the first event, which is why conditional probability is needed. Probabilities of multiple events are as simple as multiplying the probabilities together, as long as you consider how the probabilities are affected as the event progresses. This brings me to the final major topic of introductory probability, and that is independence between events. Two events, A and B, are independent if and only if knowing that event A has occurred or will occur does not change or impact the probability that event B will occur. Basically, two events are independent if the probability of A equals the probability of A on the condition of B. And the probability of B equals the probability of B on the condition of A. If the probability of A is the same regardless of if event B occurs or not, then the events are independent. This brings me back to the multiplication rule. To find the probability of A and B, and you know that A and B are independent, then all you have to do is take the probability of A times the probability of B. But that's only if they're independent because they're not affecting each other. But if you know that they are not independent or you're unsure, to find the probability of A and B, you must take the probability of A times the probability of B given that A has already occurred. By now you may be pretty confused, but here's the one big recommendation I have. You can never go wrong if you write out everything that can happen explicitly, and at that point usually probabilities are pretty easy to figure out. But, to try to get through some of the confusion, let's take a look at a couple AP-style probability questions and make sense of them using our rules. All right, the first probability question we're going to take a look at deals with a two-way table. Now, the AP Statistics exam will love working with two-way tables and probability. You'll see a couple of them scattered throughout the multiple choice, and you might even see one on the free response section. All right, here's the problem that we're going to take a look at. We surveyed 500 high school students asking them two questions. What high school do you go to? High school A, high school B, high school C. And what is your favorite flavor of slushy? Red, blue, green, or neither. Now, with a two-way table we can ask you so many different probability questions. So, let's begin. The first question is one student is selected at random from those surveyed. What is the probability that the student is from high school A? Now, we got to remember the basic probability probability rule, right? On the numerator goes the number of outcomes in favor of what we're looking for, high school A, that's 140 students divided by the total number of students in the sample space, in that case it's 500. 140 divided by 500 is 0.28 or 28%. So, the probability that a student is picked and that student goes to high school A is 28%. Second question is, again, a student is picked at random from those surveyed. What is the probability that this student prefers a red slushy? Well, once again, in our numerator is the number of kids that meet or are favored to what we're looking for, that's 275 kids we can clearly see in the two-way table that prefer a red slushy out of the total sample space of 500 students and we get 55% of students surveyed love a red slushy. The third question posed us, once again, student selected at random from those surveyed. What is the probability that that student loves a red slushy and is from high school A? Once again, remember we see that a word and we're looking for what's called joint probability. So, we're just looking at where that row and column are joined together. So, we see that there's a total of 91 students that are both in high school A and love an orange excuse me, orange red slushy. And again, you don't have to do any sophisticated math to figure that out. All you got to do is look where those two rows and columns are joined together. 91 out of 500 is 18.2%. Now, the fact that we have 18.2% of kids that both go to high school A and love a red slushy means that the two events, go to high school A and loving a red slushy, are not mutually exclusive because we literally have 91 kids that do both. And our next question, once again, starts off with given that a student is going to be picked at random from those surveys, this time it's what is the probability that that student is from high school A or likes a red slushy. Now, I can also say it the other way around. What's the probability that they like a red slushy or a high school or from high school A? That doesn't matter the order there. Now, remember, in basic probability, really simple way, or means add. But we've got to make sure that if they're not mutually exclusive, which we just said they weren't, that we subtract away any overlap. So, to find the probability, we're going to start off with the probability that a student loves a red slushy, 275 out of 500. We're going to add the probability that the student comes from high school A, 140 out of 500. But 91 kids just got double counted. See, 91 kids were counted amongst the 275 that like a red slushy, and 91 kids were also counted amongst those that are from high school A. Those 91 kids that both are from high school A and love red slushies deserve to be counted, but they don't deserve to be double counted. why we subtract away the overlap. Again, we're not getting rid of them. We're just preventing them from being double counted. So, once we do the math, we've got a common denominator. It's pretty simple, 324 out of 500 or 64.8%. Next question from this two-way table is what is the probability that the student prefers a red slushy, but there's a condition, given that the student is from high school A. So, I noticed I capitalized and I underlined and I bolded the word given. But again, you got to make sure that you understand when you see that word given, you're working with a conditional probability. So, we're trying to find the probability that the person likes the red slushy, but then we have our line for the given, and then after line is the condition that they come from high school A. Now, don't forget we have a pretty simple formula for conditional probability. The numerator is the probability of both things, A and B, in this case red slushy and from high school A, divided by the probability of the condition, which is they're from high school A. So, following the math in the numerator is the probability that they are both from high school A and love red slushies. Once again, that's 91 kids out of 500 divided by the probability they are from high school A, which is 140 divided by 500. If you're really good at math and dividing with fractions, you'll see that those 500s are going to cancel. So, we get 91 out of 140 or 65%. Now, you actually don't even need the conditional probability for this formula or for this specific problem if you truly understand conditional probability. So, the idea is that we're given that the student is from high school A. That means we're only allowed to look at that row for high school A. We're not allowed to look at the total cuz that got kids from high school B and high school C. We obviously don't want to look at the rows for B and C cuz we're given that they must be from high school A and that changes our denominator to 140. We're only allowed to look at those 140 kids from high school A and of those kids from high school A, 91 love the red slushy, so 91 out of 140. So, you can logically think through this problem to get your answer or you can certainly use the conditional probability formula and it still works to get your final answer 65%. Now, the last type of question that the AP test loves to ask when working with a two-way table is is there independence between two events. So, here we're going to stick with the two events going to high school A and liking a red slushy. And are these two events independent? Well, it's really simple cuz we have a formula that we could check to see if they're independent or not. And it's really simple. In generic terms, remember to check if two events A and B are independent, we have to find the probability of A and compare it to the probability of A given B. If they're equal, then it just goes to show that B didn't matter at all, hence they're independent. So, here what we're going to do is we're going to find the probability that the student loves a red slushy, which we've actually already did. We already know that that's 55% 275 out of 500 kids love a red slushy, no condition attached there whatsoever. Then we're going to compare that to the probability that the student loves a red slushy given that they're from high school A. So, we want to do here is we want to see does being from high school A change the probability of somebody loving a red slushy? If it changes it, then we have two And well, we just got done actually finding that conditional probability. Again, remember the conditions that they're from high school A, so there's 140 total students from high school A, and of those 140 students, 91 love red slushies. 91 out of 140 is 65%. So, what we see here is that there's a 55% probability of a student preferring a red slushy. However, if the student is from high school A, the probability they prefer a red slushy is 65%. So, being from high school A makes a student more likely to prefer a red slushy, not independent. If one event changes the probability of another, then they clearly somehow depend on each other and they're intermixed, so they cannot be independent. So, in this situation, the two events loving red slushies and being from high school A are certainly not independent. Now, obviously I focus on being from high school A and liking red slushies for this problem, but I could have worked on blue slushies, green slushies, high school B, high school C, or any combination of that to ask some really good probability questions from a two-way table. But, I gave you the key ones that you're probably going to see, whether be multiple choice or an FRQ. All right, here we have a really good probability question. The probability that Andrea purchases car one is 42%, and the probability Andrea purchases car two is 26%. She's got two cars, She might purchase car one. She might purchase car two. She might purchase both of them. She might purchase none of them. But we're given a couple easy probabilities here. Now, assuming the decision to purchase each car is made independently, which means if she buys car one has no impact on car two or vice versa, what is the probability she purchases exactly one of the two cars? Now, what a lot of people do wrong here is they just jump in saying, "Oh, we're just going to add these two probabilities together. She wants to purchase one of the two cars. We got car one. We got car two. Just add them." But no, that's actually not going to work here because remember or probability or probability means that well, we want the probability of car one only, car two only, or both. Well, based on what the question is asking, we don't want both. We just want exactly one. So, remember my suggestion is to write everything out the sample space and usually probability becomes pretty easy easy. So, what are some things that could happen? Well, she could buy car one, which we know is 42%, which means that the probability that she does not buy car two is 58%. That's just the complement rule. The probability she buys car two is 26%. So, once again, the complement rule says the probability she does not buy car two is 74%. Now, what is the sample space here? Well, she could purchase car one and not car two. Again, walk through that. She's going to purchase car one 42% and not purchase car two, which is 74%. Why am I allowed to multiply those? Because they're independent. When events are independent, you can multiply all you want without too much thinking. So, we get 0.3108. Another option, she purchases car one and car two. That's going to be 42% for her to purchase car one * 26% for her to purchase car two. We get 0.1092. Another option, she purchases car two and not car one. Again, that's going to be 26% for purchasing car two and a 58% for not purchasing car one. Multiply those together, we get 0.1508. And the last scenario is that she doesn't purchase either car. 58% she doesn't purchase car one, 74% she doesn't purchase car two, 0.4292. Now, let's go back to what the question asked. The question says, "What's the probability she purchases exactly one car?" So, of these four scenarios, two of them lead to her purchasing exactly one car. That would be car one and not car two, 0.3108. Car two and not car one, 0.1508. Add those together because only one of them could happen, one or the other, and we get the total probability that she purchases at least or not, excuse me, just exactly one car. The other two possibilities is she purchases both of them, well, that's not what the question asked, or she purchases neither of them, again, that's not what the question asked. So, the final probability, once we add those two together, is about 0.46. All right, let's take a look at another problem dealing with Andrew and her two cars, but there's a really big difference that matters so much. I really want you to take a look at this. All right, the probability that Andrew purchases car one is 42%. So, instantly we know the probability she does not purchase car one is 58%, the complement, that's easy. But this time, listen, if she purchases car one, the probability she purchases car two is 15%. The way that question is written is conditional, right? If she purchases car one, so we would need that to happen first, then the probability she purchases car two is 0.15. It's instantly telling me that what happens to car two is dependent on car one, so these are not independent like they were in the problem we just looked at. Now, the second thing it says is if she doesn't purchase car one, the probability she does purchase car two is 0.60. Once again, what is the probability that she purchases exactly one of the cars? Cars. So, again, let's break down what we were told. We know that there's a 42% chance she buys car one, the complement means a probability of 58% she does not buy car one and we know a couple conditional probabilities. Given she purchases car one, the probability she purchases car two is 15%. Given she does not purchase car one, the probability she purchases car two is 60%. Now the best thing we could do with a problem like this is make it really easy with a tree diagram to look at our four different scenarios. So in this tree diagram we see first off the two original branches, she purchases car one 42%, she does not purchase car one 58%. Now if she purchases car one it's on the upper branch here, we could purchase car two or Angie could purchase car two which is 15%. That means that we also know the complement of that which would be there's an 85% chance she does not purchase car two given that she does purchase car one. Then the bottom branch we have her not purchasing car one 58% and if she does not purchase car one, the probability she does purchase car two is 60% and again the complement of that would be 40% chance she does not purchase car two given that she does not purchase car one. Now to get to the end of any branch all we got to do is multiply and we are allowed to multiply these probabilities together cuz they're conditional. Again, you're always allowed to multiply when you're doing multiple things, she's purchasing multiple cars so we want to multiply as long as you think conditionally which is how you know how we create these tree diagrams so that we could think conditionally. So again, what two branches lead to her purchasing exactly one car? Well, she could have car one and not car two so follow that branch 0.42 * 0.85 0.357. The other branch is not purchasing car one but purchasing car two, follow that branch 0.58 for not purchasing car one 0.6 for purchasing car two 0.348. Now the top branch leads to purchasing both cars, that's not what they asked for. The bottom branch leads to purchasing no cars, again not what the question asked. Not again, the question could ask that, but that's not what I asked you. So, two branches lead to exactly one car. All we got to do is add them together because it's one or the other. Or means add. They can't both happen at the same time. So, add those two probabilities together to get our final total answer. And that would be a beautiful All I got to do is add a point 0.357 + 0.348 to get 0.705 as our final probability for this particular question. So, two questions are very similar, but it just makes a huge difference if the events are independent or if the events are not. Now, we're going to take a look at a couple what I call generic probability questions cuz we just have generic events A and B with no real-world problems or words attached to them. But the AP test loves to put these on the multiple-choice questions just to make sure that you know how the different formulas work with each other. So, let's take a look at a couple. In this first generic problem, we are given two events A and B. And we're told a couple things. First, the probability of A is 35% and the probability of event B is 20% and we're told that we need to find the probability of A or B knowing that A and B are mutually exclusive. Okay, first we're going to start off with the fact that they're asking us to find the probability of A or B. So, we know we're going to need the our or formula, one of the most important formulas when it comes to probability. The probability of A or B equals the probability of A plus the probability of B minus the probability of A and B. Now, the next step comes at other super important piece of information that they are mutually exclusive. Mutually exclusive means that the two events have no outcomes in common and cannot happen at the same time, which instantly tells us that the probability of A and B is a beautiful zero. So, now we know everything we got to do to fill in the formula. The probability of A is 0.35 plus the probability of B is 0.20 minus the probability of A and B, which we just said is zero because of the fact of mutually exclusive, and that makes the math really, really simple. We're just going to take 0.35 and add 0.20 to get 0.55 or 55%. So, the probability of A or B is 55%. And this next problem has a very similar setup. We're given two events, A and B. The probability of A is 0.35, the probability of B is 0.20, and we're asked to find the probability of A or B. But this time, it tells us that A and B are independent. All right, so where do we begin? Well, once again, us to find the probability of A or B. So, we're going to need that or formula. The probability of A or B is the probability of A plus the probability of B minus the probability of A and B. So, we can easily fill in the A with 0.35 and the B with 0.20. Now, what do we know is true when the probability of two events, or excuse me, when two events are independent? Well, when A and B are independent, it means that to find the probability of A and B, all you got to do is multiply the probability of A times the probability of B. Now, normally we got to think about, well, does A change B? But remember, when they're independent, it doesn't. A and B don't affect each other, and that is why when they're independent, we know that the probability of A and B is automatically the probability of A times the probability of B. So, we could actually, since we already know the probability of A and B, we could easily find the probability of A and B. All we got to do is take 0.35, multiply by 0.20 to get 0.07. So, now the probability of A or B is 0.35 for the probability of A plus 0.20 for the probability of B minus 0.07 for the probability of A and B. Put all that together, we get a final answer of 0.48 or 48. Or excuse me, 48%. Now, this next problem looks really similar, but it's a little bit different. And because it's a little bit different, it's going to make us have to do some dreaded algebra. But thank goodness, the algebra doesn't get too difficult. So, once again, we're given two events, A and B, and we're told the probability of A is .35 and the probability of A or B is .80 and we're asked to find the probability of B and in this first problem we're told that A and B are mutually exclusive. All right, so this time we know the probability of A or B, we know the probability of A and we're asked to find the probability of B. So since we know the probability of A or B, we're still going to want to use that or formula. The probability of A or B equals the probability of A plus the probability of B minus the probability of A and B. Now, the other information is super important that they're mutually exclusive which automatically tells us that the probability of A and B is a beautiful zero. So now we just got to fill everything in. This time we already know the probability of A or B is .80 equals the probability of A .35 plus the probability of B which we don't know so we can either turn it into an X which which you which is which you would do in algebra or you can just leave it as a probability of B minus zero because the probability of A and B is zero when you're mutually exclusive. Now we got a really simple algebra equation to solve. All we got to do is subtract the .35 to the other side to get .45. So the probability of B is .45. And our final generic question looks like this. Given two events A and B, the probability of A is .35, the probability of A or B is .80. We're asked to find the probability of B but this time A and B are independent. All right, this one involves a little bit more algebra so hopefully you can stay with me here. So first once again we know the probability of A or B but we're still going to use that formula. The probability of A plus the probability of B minus probability of A and B. Now we already know the probability of A or B so we can substitute that in as .80. We already know the probability of A so we can substitute that in as .35 and we're asked to find the probability of B so we can either just leave that as a probability of B or we can change it to an X if you really want to make this look like algebra. Now what does it mean when the two events are independent? Well once again when two events are independent it means that the probability of A and B is simply the probability of A times the probability of B. We don't have to think about any kind of conditional probabilities. So, we know the probability of A is 0.35 and we're going to multiply that by the probability of B, which we don't know. So, we end up with this equation, 0.80 = 0.35 + the probability of B - 0.35 * the probability of B. Now, what we have to recognize here is again algebra. We have some like terms. We have one probability of B - 0.35 probability of B. Those are like terms. And if that's a little bit confusing to you, just turn them into X's. Make the probability of B an X, so we have 1X - 0.35 * X, cuz again probability of B is an X. So, once again, those are like terms that we can simply combine. One probability of B - 0.35 probability of B is 0.65 probability of B. Just combining like terms with algebra here. Doesn't get too difficult. Then we have again a pretty basic algebra equation to solve. We're going to subtract the 0.55 from the 0.80 to get 0.45. Then to solve the probability of B, we have to undo that multiplication with division. So, we're going to divide 0.65 to the other side and we get a final answer of 0.692 for the probability of B. So, a really good problem. They love putting ones like this on the AP test cuz it forces you to do a little bit of algebra with some good probability work. Now, here's one final probability question I want to ask you because almost every single year on the AP stats exam, there is a problem like this in some shape or form, whether it be on a multiple choice FRQ, but it's one that challenges students. But if you know how to do it, it's actually pretty easy. Here's the problem. 2% of a population of men have a disease. There is a test that could men could take for this disease, but no test in the medical field is perfect. So, if a man has the disease, the test will give a positive result saying they have the disease 95% of the time. If the man does not have the disease, the test will have a positive result 12% of the time. Well, that's called a false positive, cuz it says it's positive, but remember, the man doesn't have the disease. What is the probability a man has a positive result? Now, what a lot of students want to do right away is they just want to say, "Oh, 95% positive, 12% positive, add those together." But then you get a number bigger than 100%, which in probability world, that's impossible. So, let's take a look at this problem. Let's really think about all the different probabilities given. First, 2% probability that a man has the disease. Well, the complement would be the man does not have the disease, 98%. That's going to help us. Now, if the man has the disease, 95% of the time it'll have a positive result. That's a true positive, a positive that is accurate. But the complement of that would be the 5% chance that it comes back negative. That would be a false negative. It says you don't have the disease, but remember, you are you actually do. Then we have that 12% positive, but that's if you do not have the disease. That means a true negative would be the 88%. That's the complement of the 12%. 88% would be the probability that you have a negative result, when again, you do not have the disease. Now, let's walk through the different outcomes that are going to be what we want, a positive result. And that's going to get us the probability we're looking for. So, first, a man can have the disease, 2%, and the test comes back positive, 95%. So, just follow that through, 0.02 have the disease, and then there is a positive result, 0.95, and we get 0.019. Once again, why are we multiplying? Cuz I'm using the word and. And means multiply. And you can always multiply when you see the word and, as long as you think conditionally. That 95% is on the condition of the 2% happening first. That's why I had to write it that way. Now, the other scenario that leads to a positive result is you do not have the disease, 98%, and you still got that 12% chance of a positive result when you do not have the disease. So, once again, 0.98 * 0.12 = 0.1176. Now, only one of these situations can happen. They both can't happen. That would be They can't both happen at the same time. That'd be impossible. So, it's one or the other. And remember that word or means add. So, we're going to add those two final probabilities together to get a final answer for the probability of a positive result, 0.1366. Now, here is another very common question in a situation like this. Given that a man gets a positive result. So, a man goes to the doctor, says, "Hey, I want to I see if I have this disease or not." Doctor gives him a test. So, given that the man gets a positive result, test comes back positive, what is the probability he actually has the disease? Now, a lot of kids want a multiple-choice they're going to guess 2% because they go back to the problem. The problem said 2% chance they have the disease, and they're just going to answer that. But, yes, there is a 2% chance a man has a disease, but this is conditional. It says, "Given that they have a positive result." So, we want to find the probability the man has the disease given that they get a positive result. So, we are going to need our conditional probability formula, which is really easy, and it's on your formula sheet. In the numerator, we have the probability of both the disease and getting a positive result. In the denominator, we have the probability of simply the condition having a positive result. Numerator's really easy. So, have the disease and positive. Just follow that scenario. Have the disease, 0.02, and 0.95. Easy. Multiply, and we get our 0.019 the numerator. Now, the denominator is the probability of getting a positive result, which we just got done figuring out, 0.1366. Let me walk you through it one more time. Have the disease, 0.02, and test positive, 0.95. Multiply or cuz it can't both have the same time, so we're going to add. Not have the disease, 0.98, times still getting a positive result, 0.12. Multiply, add, we get that 0.1366 in the denominator. Then, we just have to divide everything, divide .019 by .1366 and we get our final answer of .1391. So, if a man gets a positive result, don't worry too much, you only have about a 14% chance of actually having the disease. That's still kind of high to be honest, but it's not like a positive result instantly means you're going to have the disease because so few people actually have the disease in the first place. All right, that's it for part one, basic probability. Hopefully those examples made sense to you.
Hey statsars, welcome to the unit 2 part B summary review video covering random variables and probability distributions. Before we get started, I want to mention one quick thing. The AP statistics course exam description has recently been updated. So some of the units and topic numbers I referenced throughout this video may not perfectly match the new curriculum. However, the good news is that the content itself hasn't changed. The concepts, vocabulary, definitions, statistical techniques, and problem solving skills covered in this video are all still essential for success in AP Statistics. So, if you're looking for a comprehensive review of random variables, probability distributions, including the binomial and normal distributions, you're in the right place. Everything you need to know is right here. So, sit back, grab your notes, and let's review the key concepts together. And don't forget to check out the ultimate review packet for AP Statistics. Inside you'll find study guides, guided notes, practice worksheets, review videos, answer keys, and many other resources designed to help you prepare for your unit test throughout the year and ultimately for success on the AP statistics exam in May. Let's get started. Now, if a random process has outcomes of numerical values and those numerical values are uncertain, then we call it a random variable. Now, just know this. The outcomes of a random variable must be numerical values. Don't over complicate this. Just like an algebra class, a variable is a number that you don't know yet. Well, it's the same thing for a random variable. A random variable has an outcome that is a number that we just don't know what it is. But it could possibly be multiple different things based on uncertainty through that chance process. Now, there are two different types of random variables. Continuous random variables, which we'll talk about in unit five, so not right now. and discrete random variables which we're going to talk about right now in unit four. Now a discrete random variable is a variable that can take on a countable number of values. Each of those values of a random variable has a probability associated with it. And if you add up all those probabilities, you will get a sum of one. Now we typically use capital Latin letters like a, b, c, or x to represent a random variable. For a discrete random variable, we can make what's called a probability distribution. A probability distribution is a representation of every possible outcome of that discrete random variable and the probability associated with each of those outcomes. Now, we could either be given one of these probability distributions in the form of a graph or a table or we could use some information to create one on our own. Let's look at a couple examples. This first example of a random variable in creating a probability distribution for it involves horse racing. So, let's just say that you own a racehorse, and you're going to enter that raceh horse into two races. Now, here's what we know. The probability the horse wins the first race is 65%. If the horse wins the first race, the probability it wins the second race is 75%. However, if the horse loses the first race, the probability it wins the second race is 20%. Now, we're going to let X be the random variable how many races the horse wins. Now, why is this a discrete random variable? Because X is how many races the horse wins and that is a listable countable number of values. The horse could win zero races, the horse could win one race, or the horse could win two races. 0, one, and two are all listable, countable, and they're numerical. Now, to figure out the probabilities, because remember, probability distribution doesn't just have the list of possible outcomes for X. It also has the probabilities. We're going to need to learn a lot of the tactics that we learned back in the first video over unit 4 basic probability. Now the first thing I notice is that these are conditional probabilities because what happens for that second race all depends on what happens on that first race. Now to understand conditional probabilities it's best to make a tree diagram. So let's do that. So first the race is for race one and the horse enters it and we see that there's a 65% chance the horse wins that race which means automatically the compliment is a 35% chance the horse loses race one. Now here comes our conditional probabilities that were given to us. If the horse wins race one, so let's follow that 65%. There's a 75% chance the horse will then go on to win race two. The complement of that would be a 25% chance that the horse loses race two after the horse won race one. Then the horse could lose race one. So we're going to follow that 35% branch. Now we were told that the horse has a 20% chance to win race two if it lost race one. So that would be 20% and then the complement would be 80% chance that the horse loses race two if it already lost race one. Now to get to the end of any of these branches, all we have to do is multiply. And as long as we're understand that these are conditional probabilities. What happens for race two depends on race one, we are certainly allowed to multiply. So let's talk about the top branch where the horse wins two races. That's going to be 65 for the first race times 75 for the second race. Now that's going to give us a total of 4875 for the result of two wins. Now what about zero? Let's follow that bottom branch. No wins. 35 for the first race and then.80 for the second race. That's going to give us a total of 28. Now the other two branches are different. Lose the first, win the second or win the first, lose the second. They are different, which means they can't happen at the same time. But both of them have the same outcome of one win. So to find the probability of one win, we have to calculate each of those branches and add them together. So we have 65 win the first.25 lose the second or so. Now we're going to add the next option lose the first.35 times win the second.20. Add those options together and we get a grand total of 2325 for the probability of that the horse wins one race. So now we have a probability distribution for our discrete random variable X. We have our outcomes 0 1 and two and the associated probabilities. Now just note that we do because this is numerical we do like to put them in increasing order. Smallest at the top and then biggest at the bottom. So we like to go in that order of 0 1 and two. For our second example let's talk about having a game. And when a player plays this game the player could either get zero one two or three points on any given play of the game. Now here is a probability distribution in the form of a graph for this scenario. So across the bottom we see the outcomes 0 1 2 and three and then the graph shows us the probabilities for each of those outcomes. So we see the probability of getting zero points is 10%.1 probability of getting one point is 3% or excuse me 20%.2 probability of getting two points is 40%. 04 and the probability of getting three points is 30%.3. Now, this has a probability distribution already built for you. We already have the outcomes across the bottom and the associated probabilities. So, no real work for us to do here. But I can ask you more probability questions like, hey, what's the probability that on one play of the game you get one or three points? Okay. Well, all we have to do is add. We know that the word or means to add. So, we're going to take the probability of one point 2. We're gonna add the probability of three points three and we get a 50%.5 50% chance that on one play of the game the player scores one or three points. Now what about our formula for addition where we have to subtract away the overlap? Well, this is mutually exclusive. A player cannot get one and three points on the same play. So, we don't have to worry about subtracting anything away because we're basically subtracting away zero, which does nothing because these two events, one point, 3 point, are mutually exclusive. Here's a third example. Let's say that every year the Cookville School District has job openings for teachers. And when there's a job opening for a teacher, they have to conduct interviews. Now, let's let T represent how many teachers they interview for any one job opening. So, let's just say there's a new math teacher and they have a job opening for that new math teacher. So, they're going to have to hire some teachers and that means they're going to have to interview some teachers. So, how many teachers they interview? Well, here is a probability distribution for the random variable T. Now, this is another one that's already done for you. We have all the possibilities for T. They interview 1 2 3 4 5 or six teachers and then the associated probabilities are underneath them. Nice and simple. You don't have to do any work. It's already created for you. But again, we could ask you some very basic probability questions using those things that we learned in part one of the unit 4 summary review video. For example, what is the probability of at most three teachers needing interviewed? Well, you just have to know what at most three means. At most three means three or less. So that would be three teachers are interviewed, two teachers or one teacher. So all we got to do is add those three probabilities together to get that answer pretty easily. 111 plus 006 plus 003 and that's going to be a grand total of.20 very simple. So 20% chance that at most three teachers are interviewed. What about what is the probability of interviewing two or four teachers? Well two teachers 006 or means add four teachers 0.20 add them together for a 26% chance. Now why don't I have to subtract anything away? Well the same thing I just got mentioning got done mentioning in the previous example. Interviewing two teachers and interviewing four teachers is mutually exclusive. You can't interview four and two teachers at the same time. It's going to be one or the other. So, you don't have to worry about any overlap. One more question. What is the probability of at least four teachers being interviewed? Well, once again, all you have to do is make sure that you know what at least four means. At least four means four or more. So, we're going to add together four, five, six teachers being interviewed. That's 0.2 plus.25 plus.35. Add them together and you got your answer. It's that simple. So, when a probability distribution is given to you, it's pretty nice. It's pretty easy. All you have to do is understand what you're looking at and how to answer some pretty basic probability questions. Now, let's go back to the game problem that we looked at in example two. Now, this is going to be a little bit trickier because let's say that we're going to now play this game twice. We're going to play the game once and then we're going to play the game again. Now, we first have to assume that each play of the game is independent of the next, which means what happens on the first play, whether I get 0, one, two, or three points, has no impact on what happens on the second play. That's going to be really important. If that wasn't true, I actually couldn't do what I'm about to do. All right, so here's the deal. We're going to create a new random variable, S. S is the sum of the two plays of the game. Now, what are the possibilities for S? Well, first off, what we're looking at is the probability distribution for one play of the game. We could score 0, one, two, or three points for one play of the game. But what about the sum of two plays? Well, first we could get zero points. How would we get zero points? We'd have to get zero on the first game and then zero on the second game. That's a very easy probability to calculate. 0.1 * 0.1 001. We're done. Now, what about the probability of one point? Okay, this is where we really have to think about the fact that we're playing the game twice. There's a first play of the game and then there's a second play of the game. So, to get a total of one point, we could get a zero on the first play and then a one on the second play. Or we could get a one on the first play and a zero on the second play. Now, they both involve a zero and a one, but here order matters because there's the first play of the game and the second play of the game. Now, the good news is this. getting a zero and getting a one those probabilities don't change and the order we multiply doesn't matter. So for the first scenario zero on the first it' be 0.1 * 1 on the second times that by 02. So 0.1 *2 but if we switch that around we get the one first and then the zero. Well multiplication it's still going to be 2 * 0.1. But again they are different. Ultimately, each scenario is a 0.1 times a 2, but there's two different scenarios that are distinctly different. So, one way we could speed that up is just doing 0.1*2 and then multiplying by two for the two different possible ways that can happen. All right, what about getting two points? Okay, let's walk through this. We could get a zero and then a two or a two and then a zero. Those are distinctly different. Or we could get a one and a one. Now, there's only one way that can happen. 1 one. We can't switch it around, make it look any different. It's still 1 one no matter how you look at it. So, we have three different scenarios. So, for the zero and the two, that's 0.1 * 04. But there's two ways. So, I'm going to do 0.1 * 04 * 2 because there's two scenarios. 02 or two 0. Or the other scenario that can only happen one way is 1 one. And that's 2 * 2. All right. Hopefully by now you're starting to get the hang of this. Let's speed it up a little bit. What about three points? Well, we could do 03 3 0 or 1 2 or 2 1. So, we actually have four different scenarios there. What about four points? Well, we could do 1 3 or 3 1 or 2. Okay, three different scenarios there. Finding the probabilities is pretty simple. Then we could get five points. 2 three or 32. Two different scenarios there. And then finally, we have six points. There's only one way that could happen. 33. Again, you can't make that look different. 33 33 is still 33. So that would be.3 *.3 for our probability of getting six total points. So now we could create our probability distribution here showing all of those possible outcomes. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 for the sum of two plays and the associated probabilities. But you just have to be very careful calculating all those probabilities. Now one thing I like to do at the very end is add them all together to ensure that you are going to get a total sum of one. All probability distributions for a discrete random variable should have all the probabilities adding up to one. So in total we find the probability of getting a zero points is 0.01. The probability of getting one point is 0.04. The probability of getting two points is 0.12. The probability of getting three points is 22. The probability of getting four points is 28. The probability of getting five points is 0.24 and the probability of getting six points is 0.09. And if you add all this together, guess what? You get one or as a percentage 100% which means we did our work correct. So problems where you have to take a probability distribution and then repeat it sometimes can be a little bit tricky. So make sure you take your time, write out everything that can happen and make sure you understand if you change the order how it does matter when there's a first play and a second play. And then creating the probability distribution isn't that bad. Now since a random variable is numerical an interpretation of a probability distribution can be made that it gives us information about the shape the center and the spread. Now let's talk about shape first because if you have a probability distribution talking about the shape of it is actually really really simple. Now if you have a graph all you got to do is look at it. Does it look skewed left? Does it look skewed right? Does it look symmetrical? Does it look biodal? Or if you have just the probability distribution table, well then you sometimes either could make a quick graph or just kind of visualize one. Let's actually take a look at the problem we saw earlier for how many teachers they're going to interview for any one job opening. So if we look here, we notice that the probabilities increase as we move from left to right. So the probabilities of 1, two, three are kind of lower where the probabilities of five and six are kind of higher. So just visualize that would be a skewed left graph. the outcomes on the right are way more likely than the outcomes on the left. And if we were to make a histogram of that, we would see a skewed left graph. So we could easily talk about shape when we're talking about a probability distribution. Whereas if the outcomes on the far left and the outcomes on the far right were both low and the outcomes in the middle were much higher, well then that would be roughly mount shaped and symmetric or unimodal. So all those things we learned way back in unit one when it comes to describing the shape, we could use here as well for probability distributions. Next, we can find the mean, which is referred to as the expected value of a random variable, and the standard deviation of a random variable to help us describe the center and the spread of a probability distribution. Let's start off talking about the mean. The mean is also known as the expected value. It's what we expect the outcome of the random variable to be in the long run after many, many, many, many trials or many, many, many passings of this random process of this random variable. Now, to find the expected value or the mean, it's actually not that complicated. All you have to do is take each outcome times its probability and then add all those together. So we could do that by hand. Outcome times probability plus outcome times its probability plus outcome times it probability dot dot dot dot dot. Or we also have this formula given to us on the APS stats formula sheet which use which tells us that the mean mu. Now remember why we're using that symbol mu because here we're talking about the long run which is essentially infinite, right? We're talking about the population or a parameter here. So we're saying that the mean, the expected value for this random variable X in the long run is well here it is. It's using this formula. So that giant looking E is sigma. So we're going to add together each individual outcome times that individual outcomes probability. Once we multiply and add all those together, we'll get our expected value. Now the standard deviation form is a little bit trickier. First, the standard deviation symbol is sigma. So the standard deviation of our random variable X equals All right, let me walk you through this here because it's going to be a little bit trickier than the mean. But what you do is you take each individual outcome minus the mean which you have to calculate first square that difference multiply by the probability of that individual. Now once you get done doing all that outcome minus the mean squared times the probability and you add all those together you get what we call variance. Then you square root all of that variance to get what we call standard deviation. Now, I know those two formulas for the mean and the standard deviation are a little bit tricky and a little bit overwhelming, but don't let that concern you. In a couple moments, I'm actually going to show you how you could use your TID4 calculator to find both of them with very little work. But perhaps what's most important than the formulas is actually understanding what these two values represent. The mean is the expected value of the random variable in the long run. So if we were to repeat the random variable many many many times, it's the expected or the average value we would expect in the long run. For example, if we said, "Hey, uh there's a new job opening. How many teachers do you expect to have to interview?" Well, that's what the mean of the random variable would be. Now, this purpose of the standard deviation is to give us an idea of the precision of that expected value. High values of a standard deviation relative to the expected value tell us that the expected value is well very imprecise. Whereas if we had low values of the standard deviation relative to the expected values, it would give us an opposite implication. Now the standard deviation gives an idea of a plus or minus range for the expected variable. So we could actually kind of find a interval for what outcomes of the random variable are most likely to occur by taking the mean going up and going down one standard deviation. Now let's quickly talk about how we could use our T84 calculator to find the mean and standard deviation of a discrete random variable for us. Now the first thing we're going to need to have our calculator find the mean standard deviation for us is we need the probability distribution. Again, we're going to need each individual outcome of the random variable and its associated probability. Let's use the teacher job interview example for this particular problem. So, the first thing we have to do is put this data into our calculator. So, we're going to hit stat edit. Now, this is where we can actually enter in lists of information into our calculator. So, in list one, we're going to put the outcomes 1 2 3 4 5 6. So, list one is the outcomes for the random variable. And then in list two, we're going to put the associated probabilities. Just make sure that the probabilities are next to the correct outcome. So next to one, we need 03. Next to two, we need 006. Then 0.11, 0.20, 0.25, and 35. That's it. That's actually all the hard work you have to do. Now, all you're going to do is hit stat, slide over to calculate in the middle, and then select one variable stats at the very, very top. Now, it's going to ask you for two things here. The first thing it's going to say, where is the list of data there? We're going to make sure we put list one. So second number one if it's not already there for you already. Now that's where it's going to look for the possible outcomes of a random variable. But then underneath it says frequency list. Now we need to tell it that the outcomes in list one are not equally likely. They have associated probabilities or frequencies for them. So in the frequency list line, we're going to need to put list two where our probabilities are. So second number two. Then all you got to do is hit enter and everything is there for you. The very very top is the mean. Now the only thing I don't like is it uses Xbar. It's actually not Xbar because this is not a sample. This is all you know many many many right. This is a lot number a large run large number of jobs. So it's job opening after job opening after job opening. And we're going to find the mean or the expected number of teachers that would need to be interviewed. Now at the very top we see that value. Now down below we see sigma. Sigma is the standard deviation. And I like that symbol because that is sigma the standard deviation. So we see that on average the expected value is 4.63 teachers for any one job opening. So if somebody said, "Hey, how many teachers do you expect to interview for that new math job?" Well, 4.63. But sometimes it's a little bit more, sometimes a little bit less. the standard deviation would be 1.37 teachers. Understanding what those two numbers means again is super important. So oftent times on the AP stat test, they're going to ask you to find those values and interpret them. So you'd say something like this. In the long run, if the school district were to have many job openings, they would expect to interview 4.63 teachers for each job opening, but that value could easily vary by 1.37 teachers. All right, that's how easy it is to use your calculator to find the mean and standard deviation of a discrete random variable. First up is the binomial distribution. The binomial distribution is a probability distribution for a very special discrete random variable. Meaning that the outcomes are countable numerical values. It represents the random variable X, which equals the number of successes in n repeated trials. In other words, if a random process is repeated where only two things can happen on each trial, either success or fail, the binomial distribution counts the number of successes you will have in n opportunities or n trials. Now, what do I mean success? Well, a success is simply what we're looking for. It could be anything, good or bad. It's simply what we're looking to have happen on any specific trial. Now there are a few ground rules that we have to follow in order for a binomial distribution to work. First, what is success must be clearly defined and the probability of success must be given. We call the probability of success P. Also, the probability of success must stay the same on every single trial or opportunity. It cannot go up or down as the problem progresses. Now the other thing we automatically know when we have the probability of success is its complement which would be the probability of failure. So the probability of success is what we're looking to happen and then failure would be what we don't want to happen just the opposite of success. Now the next rule is that every single trial or opportunity must be independent of the next which means what happens on one trial whether it's success or fail cannot happen that cannot affect the next or the next or the next. Now the last rule is that there must be given a set number of trouser opportunities which we call n. Now this is why it actually gets known as the binomial distribution. We all know that the prefix by means two. Well in a binomial problem you must be given two things. A the probability of success which we call p and the second thing you must be given is n a set number of trials or opportunities. Now remember a probability distribution must have two things. First a list of all the outcomes and the second is the probability of each of those outcomes. So since a binomial distribution is a probability distribution we need to have those two two things as well. A list of all possibilities for X and the probabilities of each of those values. Okay. So in a generic example where we have seven trials or seven opportunities for success and the probability of success is given to us as 22% on any given trial. Then X represents how many successes we could have in those seven trials. So what are the possible outcomes for the number of successes we could have in seven trials? Well, we could have zero successes, one success, two success, three, four, five, six, or seven successes. With only seven opportunities, we can't have eight, nine, or 10 successes. That's impossible. And you can't have 2.5 successes. You could either have three or you could have two. So, that's it for the list of our possible values for X, 0 through 7. Nice and simple. Now, what about the probabilities? Well, here is our generic formula to find the probabilities of each of those individual values that X could take on. Now, all of the pieces of this formula could be explained a lot easier if we use an example. So, here it is. Now, David is a member of a frequent flyers club. On any given flight, he is a 22% chance of getting his seat upgraded to first class. in his next seven flights, how many upgrades can he get? Now, let's start off by checking through all of our rules. First, success is clearly defined as getting an upgrade to first class. And the probability of this happening on any given flight is 22%. Now, note not getting an upgrade is failure. That's the complement. 1 minus 0.22 is 0.78. So, we got a 22% chance of successfully getting an upgrade, 78% chance of failing to get an upgrade. Now, we assume since it said that there's a 22% chance of getting an upgrade on any given flight that each flight's chances of an upgrade are independent of all the others. Lastly, a set number of trials or opportunities to get an upgrade is clearly given to us as seven. Now, the list of outcomes is really easy. zero upgrades, one, two, three, four, five, six, or seven upgrades. Now, what about to find the probabilities? Let's start off with getting exactly two upgrades in his next seven flights. Now, one scenario is he gets the upgrade on his first flight. Second flight is a no. Third flight's a no. Fourth flight's a no. Fifth flight is another upgrade. Six and seven flights are both nos. Now this would be success and then fail and then fail and then fail and then success and then fail and then fail. Now we are allowed to multiply probabilities here because these outcomes are all independent. So that would be 222 *22 * 78 * 78 * 78 * 78 * 78. Now yes I'm multiplying a little bit out of order here but does it matter? Order of multiplication doesn't matter, right? I could also use exponents to make it faster. 22 to the 2 times 78 to the 5th. The point is is that I have seven different flights. Two of them have upgrades. So I have 22 to the 2 and five of them don't. Yes, in this specific situation, I have the upgrade on the first flight and on the fifth flight. But regardless of that, the probability is going to be 0.22 squared for the two successes and 78 to the 5th. When you actually multiply those probabilities out, it order doesn't really matter. But wait, another distinctly different scenario would be no upgrade on the first flight, no upgrade on the second, no upgrade on the third. On the fourth, yes, he gets an upgrade. On the fifth, yes, he gets an upgrade. On the sixth, no. And on the seventh, no. Now, here's the good news. The probability is still 22 squared time 78 to the 5th. Again, order doesn't matter that we multiply. In that scenario, we have 5.78 not getting an upgrade and two2s getting an upgrade. So, the real question is how many ways can we have two successes out of seven trials? Because I just went over two different specific scenarios, both ending with two upgrades. Now again the probabilities were exactly the same but they are different so I have to take them into account as being different. But how many other scenarios of two upgrades out of seven are there? Well that is what seven choose two figures out for us. The number of combinations of two out of seven trials. So in our formula to figure out the probability of two successes in this problem, the first part the seven choose two tells us how many different ways we could have two successes in seven trials. Then we have the probability that is the same for every one of those combinations. 2 to the or 22 squared for the two successes times 78 to the 5th for the five failures. Okay. So how do we calculate the seven choose two to get how many different possibilities we have? Again we understand that there are multiple possibilities. The probability of each of those probabilities is the same. We have22* 78 5th. But how many possibilities are there? All right. There are three ways that we could actually figure this out. First we could use the formula. Now you'll find this formula in any textbook. You find it on any website. But the formula for n choose x n trials. We're looking for x successes is n factorial / n - x factorial * x factorial. Now for our specific problem that would be 7 factorial on top five or excuse me 7 minus 2 would be 5 factorial on the bottom times 2 factorial. Now if you do all the math you get 21. Now if you're like what the heck is a factorial? Okay maybe you don't want to go with option one which is using that formula. The second option is you can actually use your calculator. It's really nice and simple. Now, the first thing you have to do is type in seven. Type in seven first on your calculator. Then hit the math button on the left side. Slide over to PRB, which stands for probability. Choose option three for NCR. That's exactly what we're doing. N choose R. Now, they use an R instead of an X. Not really sure why. Who cares? So, you're going to bring the NCR to your screen and then type in two. So, on your screen, it says 7 choose 2. hit enter and you'll get 21 ways or 21 options. Now, there is another way to do it on your calculator which it actually does all the work for you and just give me a minute. I'm going to show you how to do that and that's probably the option you're going to end up going with at the end anyway because it's kind of a cheat. It actually does all the math for you. But either way, there are 21 different options. So, there are 21 different options for having seven flights and two of them giving an upgrade. I already walked you through two of them, but there are 19 more. But again, all you need to know is that there's 21 options. For each of those options, the probability is the same. 222 squared 78 to the 5th. Times up it by 21 just to make the math a lot faster. So if you think about it, the formula has three parts. The first part tells you how many ways you could have x successes in n trials. The second part is your total number of successes. And then the last part is your total number of failures. But like I mentioned on your calculator, we could do it all at once. It could literally do everything. It could do all three parts at once and just jump to an answer without you having to do much work at all. Let me walk you through it. Now, the first thing you're going to do is you're going to hit second, then vars. This is a list of different distributions. You're going to scroll down until you see bnome PDF. This stands for the binomial model PDF. Now, when you click on that, you're going to see a menu that asks you for a few things. It's going to ask for the number of trials, which in our case would be seven. The probability of success is next. That's P.22 for our problem. And the value of X that we want to find the probability of, which in for our specific problem right now, that is two. Hit enter. Bring it to the home screen. Hit enter again. And boom, you get the probability right away, 293, which we already knew if we did it the long way. But by using this shortcut in the calculator, we get the answer right away. Now, that's it. We could repeat this process for all other outcomes. So to find the probability of six or five or three or one success, we could use this shortcut in the calculator. Makes it really easy. Now, some outcomes are easier like zero successes. There's only one way that you can have zero successes. That's it. Zero successes, all seven failures. 78 to the 7. The seven choose zero is just one. and try it on your own if you want, but it's just showing you there's only one way you could have no successes, all failures. That's it. One way. And then 0 2 to the zero. Anything raised to zero, no successes. Success is 22. Raise it to the zero because there's none of them. Well, anything raised to zero is going to get you one. So, at the end of the day, that probability is pretty easy. 78 to the 7th. Now, the same thing could be said for seven upgrades. One way you could have seven upgrades. They're all upgraded. 22 to the 7th. 7 choose 7 is one. There's only one way it can happen. And then for the 78, well, you raise it to the zero because there are no failures since they're all successes. And anything raised to 0ero is one. So the other day, we would just get 222 raised to the 7th. But no matter what, the shortcut on the calculator gets you the answer every single time. So here is the final probability distribution showing all outcomes and their probabilities for X. how many upgrades David can get out of seven flights. Now, you may have noticed on your calculator underneath the binomial PDF is a binomial CDF. What is that? Well, let's try it out. All right, so the first thing we're going to do is we're going to hit second vs and then we're going to scroll down until we find the binomial CDF. Now, the screen looks exactly the same other than it does say binome CDF at the top. It's very small but big difference in what it does. Now, it's going to ask you for the number of trials, which we're going to put in seven. It's going to ask you for the probability of success. We're going to put in 022. And it's going to ask you again for X. But when using the CDF, it will calculate the probability of the outcome you put in for X and add to it all outcomes less than X. So if I put a four there, it will find the probability of four successes, but it will also add in three, two, one, or zero successes. So it's going to accumulate the number you type in and anything below it. Now, this can be very, very handy if you were asked to find the probability of at most four upgrades. It's going to save you time because at most four upgrades means four or less. So, rather than doing four, then doing three, then doing two, then doing one, then doing zero, and adding them all together, you could just do a binomial CDF, typing in a four, and it's going to calculate 4 3 2 1 and zero all for you. Let's do one more example here that you might actually see on an AP exam or maybe a multiple choice question on the AP exam. What is the probability of four or more upgrades? Okay, let's walk through first off what that represents. Four or more. That would be four or five or six or seven upgrades out of the next seven flights. Now, one way we could do that is to actually take the time to calculate the probability for four, five, six, and seven. Add them all together. We could either find those probabilities the long way doing the work by hand or we could use the PDFs. A PDF for four, a PDF for five, a PDFs for six, a PDF for seven. Get those probabilities and add them all together. But another thing we could do is think about the complement. What do we not want? The opposite of four or more is three or less. 3 2 1 and zero. And that's exactly what a binome CDF could do. It could do the number less. So if I do a binome CDF, seven trials, probability of success 22, and I put a three for X, because I'm doing a binome CDF, it's going to automatically calculate 3 2 1 and zero. Now remember, that's what I don't want. I wanted four or more. But if I find what I don't want, I could do one minus that and I could always get what I do want. So in order for me to find this probability very quickly, all I got to do is a binomial CDF with a three. That's going to give me the probability of 3 2 1 and 0, which is 954. Then I just got to do one minus 954 to get 0.046. So the probability of getting four or more upgrades of the next seven flights is about 4.6%. 046. So again, you have two different ways to do it. You could take the time to calculate what it's asking for, four, five, six, seven. Or you could do the binomial CDF to do everything else, one minus it, to get your answer a lot faster. So, if you know how the binome PDF and the binome CDF work, it should make finding any probability with a binomial distribution really, really easy. Now, some kids could say, well, if the shortcuts are on your calculator, why would I ever need that formula for the binomial distribution and its probabilities? Well, I mean, you're right to be honest, but one thing I could definitely tell you is that there could be or there will be a multiple choice question where the choices are not to find the actual numerical answer to the probability, but to choose the proper formula that would find you the answer. So, they're going to make sure that you you know to recognize what that n choose x represents and what the p raised the x represents and all those different, like I said, three parts that probability formula. So, I know that the calculator could do a lot of the work for you, and that's awesome. It's going to save you a lot of time, but you'd have to know how to show your work. Whether it be for a multiple choice question that's going to show your work, or for an F FRQ, where you kind of have to show your work. Now, like all discrete random variables, we could calculate the mean and standard deviation of the random variable using the formulas that I taught you in the part two video over random variables. But if you have a binomial situation, a binomial scenario, we actually have two amazing shortcuts to find the mean and standard deviation for you a lot faster. What those formulas are going to do for you. Here is the formula for the mean. All you have to do to find the mean of a binomial distribution is take n * p. It's that simple. It's like one of the easiest formulas in the world. To find the standard deviation for a binomial distribution, you have to take the square root of n * p * 1 minus p, which is the complement. Now, in our scenario, the mean is going to be 7 *22, which is 1.54. And the standard deviation is going to be the square root of 7 *22 * 78, which is 1.096. Now, these two formulas for the mean standard deviation of a binomial distribution are given to you on the AP exam. But what matters most is that you know how to explain them. So in our scenario, this would mean that in the long run after many repetitions of this scenario with seven flights and looking for upgrades, we expect to see a average or a mean of 1.54 upgrades out of seven. But of course that number could vary. It could be more, could be less. That's where the standard deviation of 1.096 comes into play. The normal distribution could be used to model continuous random variables that of course follow a normal distribution, which many continuous random variables do. But I guess we should probably quickly remind you what a continuous random variable is. A continuous random variable is a variable that can take on any numerical value within a specified domain. And any interval within that specified domain has a probability associated with it. The one thing unfortunately you cannot do with a continuous random variable is find the probability of an individual specific numerical outcome. Discrete random variables, yes, you could do that, but not with continuous random variables. All we could do is specify an interval, meaning a lower value to an upper value. And within that interval, we could use hopefully the normal distribution if the continuous random variable follows a normal distribution. But if it does, we could use a normal distribution to tell us the probability of a particular value of that continuous random variable falling in that specified interval. So here in this picture, we see a normal distribution and of course hopefully remember a normal distribution is entirely ran by two values. The mean smack dab in the middle and the standard deviation. And the normal distribution tells us that we can go up one, two, three standard deviations down one, two, three standard deviations as well. Now, we could go further up and further down. Technically, the normal distribution goes all the way from negative infinity to infinity. But what the normal distribution tells us is that 99.7% of your variable or of your outcomes falls within three standard deviations. That's negative3 to positive 3. So, in this particular picture, what we're looking at is the area between zcore 1 and zcore 2. and the area in between represents the probability that a outcome of the continuous random variable will fall in that interval. And once again, we could find that probability using a Z table if you know how to use those. They're kind of ancient. Not too many people use them anymore. Or you can also use technology. There's plenty of websites out there, including the TID4 calculator, which has that normal CDF feature that again can find that probability in between two zcores. Now, we've already covered a ton of the normal distribution way back in unit one. I have tons more videos on my YouTube channel about normal model calculations, but let's actually take a look at an example right now so we can quickly remind ourselves how the normal distribution works. Max has been saving money each month for a long time. The amount she contributes to her savings account each month follows a normal distribution with a mean of $55.20 and a standard deviation of $8.15. So, here we're working with a continuous random variable X. How much money does Maxi contribute to her savings account? We know the mean. We know the standard deviation. And we know that it falls a normal distribution, which means that life is going to be really easy for us. Now, the first question here is what is the probability that next month she contributes more than $60. So, the first thing we have to do is figure out on that standard normal model, where does $60 fall? And that's of course by finding the zcore. So we take 60 the value that we're asked about subtract the mean divide by the standard deviation and we get our zcore in this case 0.589 which I have marked with the red line. Then we want to find the probability that a particular outcome how much money she contributes is greater than 60 which is equivalent to a zcore being greater than.589 which I have shaded in red. And again you could use a z table or you could use your t4 calculator to find that probability and we get 27.8%. So there's a 27.8% 8% probability that in any given month she contributes more than $60. Here's a second example following that same problem. This time we're asked what amount of money would indicate the top 5% and bottom 5% of contributions. So once again we have that normal distribution set up and what we have to first do in this case is find the zcores that represent that bottom 5% and that top 5%. Now once again how do you find those zcores? Well, you could use a Z table in backwards, or you could go ahead and use invert norm on your TID4 calculator. And again, we've already learned all that back in unit one. But if you know how to do all that, you could quickly get the Zcore that represents that top 5% and bottom 5%, which is a zcore of either negative 1.645 or positive 1.645. Then what we could do is take those two zcores and plug them into our zcore formula where we already know the mean of $55.20 and the standard deviation of $8.15. So we could back solve for X, multiply by the standard deviation, add the mean over, and we get our two individual values that represent that bottom and top five%. So any value above um $68.61 61 cents would represent the top 5% of contri of contributions and anything below $41.79 would represent the bottom.